Source: pdfs_data/bitcoin.pdf
Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System
Satoshi Nakamoto
satoshin@gmx.com
www.bitcoin.org
Abstract. A purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash would allow online
payments to be sent directly from one party to another without going through a
financial institution. Digital signatures provide part of the solution, but the main
benefits are lost if a trusted third party is still required to prevent double-spending.
We propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer network.
The network timestamps transactions by hashing them into an ongoing chain of
hash-based proof-of-work, forming a record that cannot be changed without redoing
the proof-of-work. The longest chain not only serves as proof of the sequence of
events witnessed, but proof that it came from the largest pool of CPU power. As
long as a majority of CPU power is controlled by nodes that are not cooperating to
attack the network, they'll generate the longest chain and outpace attackers. The
network itself requires minimal structure. Messages are broadcast on a best effort
basis, and nodes can leave and rejoin the network at will, accepting the longest
proof-of-work chain as proof of what happened while they were gone.
1. Introduction
Commerce on the Internet has come to rely almost exclusively on financial institutions serving as
trusted third parties to process electronic payments. While the system works well enough for
most transactions, it still suffers from the inherent weaknesses of the trust based model.
Completely non-reversible transactions are not really possible, since financial institutions cannot
avoid mediating disputes. The cost of mediation increases transaction costs, limiting the
minimum practical transaction size and cutting off the possibility for small casual transactions,
and there is a broader cost in the loss of ability to make non-reversible payments for non-
reversible services. With the possibility of reversal, the need for trust spreads. Merchants must
be wary of their customers, hassling them for more information than they would otherwise need.
A certain percentage of fraud is accepted as unavoidable. These costs and payment uncertainties
can be avoided in person by using physical currency, but no mechanism exists to make payments
over a communications channel without a trusted party.
What is needed is an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust,
allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted
third party. Transactions that are computationally impractical to reverse would protect sellers
from fraud, and routine escrow mechanisms could easily be implemented to protect buyers. In
this paper, we propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer distributed
timestamp server to generate computational proof of the chronological order of transactions. The
system is secure as long as honest nodes collectively control more CPU power than any
cooperating group of attacker nodes.
1
2. Transactions
We define an electronic coin as a chain of digital signatures. Each owner transfers the coin to the
next by digitally signing a hash of the previous transaction and the public key of the next owner
and adding these to the end of the coin. A payee can verify the signatures to verify the chain of
ownership.
Transaction Transaction Transaction
Owner 1's Owner 2's Owner 3's
Public Key Public Key Public Key
Hash Hash Hash
Verify Verify
Owner 0's Owner 1's Owner 2's
Signature Signature Signature
Sign Sign
Owner 1's Owner 2's Owner 3's
Private Key Private Key Private Key
The problem of course is the payee can't verify that one of the owners did not double-spend
the coin. A common solution is to introduce a trusted central authority, or mint, that checks every
transaction for double spending. After each transaction, the coin must be returned to the mint to
issue a new coin, and only coins issued directly from the mint are trusted not to be double-spent.
The problem with this solution is that the fate of the entire money system depends on the
company running the mint, with every transaction having to go through them, just like a bank.
We need a way for the payee to know that the previous owners did not sign any earlier
transactions. For our purposes, the earliest transaction is the one that counts, so we don't care
about later attempts to double-spend. The only way to confirm the absence of a transaction is to
be aware of all transactions. In the mint based model, the mint was aware of all transactions and
decided which arrived first. To accomplish this without a trusted party, transactions must be
publicly announced [1], and we need a system for participants to agree on a single history of the
order in which they were received. The payee needs proof that at the time of each transaction, the
majority of nodes agreed it was the first received.
3. Timestamp Server
The solution we propose begins with a timestamp server. A timestamp server works by taking a
hash of a block of items to be timestamped and widely publishing the hash, such as in a
newspaper or Usenet post [2-5]. The timestamp proves that the data must have existed at the
time, obviously, in order to get into the hash. Each timestamp includes the previous timestamp in
its hash, forming a chain, with each additional timestamp reinforcing the ones before it.
Hash Hash
Block Block
Item Item ... Item Item ...
2
4. Proof-of-Work
To implement a distributed timestamp server on a peer-to-peer basis, we will need to use a proof-
of-work system similar to Adam Back's Hashcash [6], rather than newspaper or Usenet posts.
The proof-of-work involves scanning for a value that when hashed, such as with SHA-256, the
hash begins with a number of zero bits. The average work required is exponential in the number
of zero bits required and can be verified by executing a single hash.
For our timestamp network, we implement the proof-of-work by incrementing a nonce in the
block until a value is found that gives the block's hash the required zero bits. Once the CPU
effort has been expended to make it satisfy the proof-of-work, the block cannot be changed
without redoing the work. As later blocks are chained after it, the work to change the block
would include redoing all the blocks after it.
Block Block
Prev Hash Nonce Prev Hash Nonce
Tx Tx ... Tx Tx ...
The proof-of-work also solves the problem of determining representation in majority decision
making. If the majority were based on one-IP-address-one-vote, it could be subverted by anyone
able to allocate many IPs. Proof-of-work is essentially one-CPU-one-vote. The majority
decision is represented by the longest chain, which has the greatest proof-of-work effort invested
in it. If a majority of CPU power is controlled by honest nodes, the honest chain will grow the
fastest and outpace any competing chains. To modify a past block, an attacker would have to
redo the proof-of-work of the block and all blocks after it and then catch up with and surpass the
work of the honest nodes. We will show later that the probability of a slower attacker catching up
diminishes exponentially as subsequent blocks are added.
To compensate for increasing hardware speed and varying interest in running nodes over time,
the proof-of-work difficulty is determined by a moving average targeting an average number of
blocks per hour. If they're generated too fast, the difficulty increases.
5. Network
The steps to run the network are as follows:
1) New transactions are broadcast to all nodes.
2) Each node collects new transactions into a block.
3) Each node works on finding a difficult proof-of-work for its block.
4) When a node finds a proof-of-work, it broadcasts the block to all nodes.
5) Nodes accept the block only if all transactions in it are valid and not already spent.
6) Nodes express their acceptance of the block by working on creating the next block in the
chain, using the hash of the accepted block as the previous hash.
Nodes always consider the longest chain to be the correct one and will keep working on
extending it. If two nodes broadcast different versions of the next block simultaneously, some
nodes may receive one or the other first. In that case, they work on the first one they received,
but save the other branch in case it becomes longer. The tie will be broken when the next proof-
of-work is found and one branch becomes longer; the nodes that were working on the other
branch will then switch to the longer one.
3
New transaction broadcasts do not necessarily need to reach all nodes. As long as they reach
many nodes, they will get into a block before long. Block broadcasts are also tolerant of dropped
messages. If a node does not receive a block, it will request it when it receives the next block and
realizes it missed one.
6. Incentive
By convention, the first transaction in a block is a special transaction that starts a new coin owned
by the creator of the block. This adds an incentive for nodes to support the network, and provides
a way to initially distribute coins into circulation, since there is no central authority to issue them.
The steady addition of a constant of amount of new coins is analogous to gold miners expending
resources to add gold to circulation. In our case, it is CPU time and electricity that is expended.
The incentive can also be funded with transaction fees. If the output value of a transaction is
less than its input value, the difference is a transaction fee that is added to the incentive value of
the block containing the transaction. Once a predetermined number of coins have entered
circulation, the incentive can transition entirely to transaction fees and be completely inflation
free.
The incentive may help encourage nodes to stay honest. If a greedy attacker is able to
assemble more CPU power than all the honest nodes, he would have to choose between using it
to defraud people by stealing back his payments, or using it to generate new coins. He ought to
find it more profitable to play by the rules, such rules that favour him with more new coins than
everyone else combined, than to undermine the system and the validity of his own wealth.
7. Reclaiming Disk Space
Once the latest transaction in a coin is buried under enough blocks, the spent transactions before
it can be discarded to save disk space. To facilitate this without breaking the block's hash,
transactions are hashed in a Merkle Tree [7][2][5], with only the root included in the block's hash.
Old blocks can then be compacted by stubbing off branches of the tree. The interior hashes do
not need to be stored.
Block Block
Block Header (Block Hash) Block Header (Block Hash)
Prev Hash Nonce Prev Hash Nonce
Root Hash Root Hash
Hash01 Hash23 Hash01 Hash23
Hash0 Hash1 Hash2 Hash3 Hash2 Hash3
Tx0 Tx1 Tx2 Tx3 Tx3
Transactions Hashed in a Merkle Tree After Pruning Tx0-2 from the Block
A block header with no transactions would be about 80 bytes. If we suppose blocks are
generated every 10 minutes, 80 bytes * 6 * 24 * 365 = 4.2MB per year. With computer systems
typically selling with 2GB of RAM as of 2008, and Moore's Law predicting current growth of
1.2GB per year, storage should not be a problem even if the block headers must be kept in
memory.
4
8. Simplified Payment Verification
It is possible to verify payments without running a full network node. A user only needs to keep
a copy of the block headers of the longest proof-of-work chain, which he can get by querying
network nodes until he's convinced he has the longest chain, and obtain the Merkle branch
linking the transaction to the block it's timestamped in. He can't check the transaction for
himself, but by linking it to a place in the chain, he can see that a network node has accepted it,
and blocks added after it further confirm the network has accepted it.
Longest Proof-of-Work Chain
Block Header Block Header Block Header
Prev Hash Nonce Prev Hash Nonce Prev Hash Nonce
Merkle Root Merkle Root Merkle Root
Hash01 Hash23
Merkle Branch for Tx3
Hash2 Hash3
Tx3
As such, the verification is reliable as long as honest nodes control the network, but is more
vulnerable if the network is overpowered by an attacker. While network nodes can verify
transactions for themselves, the simplified method can be fooled by an attacker's fabricated
transactions for as long as the attacker can continue to overpower the network. One strategy to
protect against this would be to accept alerts from network nodes when they detect an invalid
block, prompting the user's software to download the full block and alerted transactions to
confirm the inconsistency. Businesses that receive frequent payments will probably still want to
run their own nodes for more independent security and quicker verification.
9. Combining and Splitting Value
Although it would be possible to handle coins individually, it would be unwieldy to make a
separate transaction for every cent in a transfer. To allow value to be split and combined,
transactions contain multiple inputs and outputs. Normally there will be either a single input
from a larger previous transaction or multiple inputs combining smaller amounts, and at most two
outputs: one for the payment, and one returning the change, if any, back to the sender.
Transaction
In Out
In ...
...
It should be noted that fan-out, where a transaction depends on several transactions, and those
transactions depend on many more, is not a problem here. There is never the need to extract a
complete standalone copy of a transaction's history.
5
10. Privacy
The traditional banking model achieves a level of privacy by limiting access to information to the
parties involved and the trusted third party. The necessity to announce all transactions publicly
precludes this method, but privacy can still be maintained by breaking the flow of information in
another place: by keeping public keys anonymous. The public can see that someone is sending
an amount to someone else, but without information linking the transaction to anyone. This is
similar to the level of information released by stock exchanges, where the time and size of
individual trades, the "tape", is made public, but without telling who the parties were.
Traditional Privacy Model
Identities Transactions Trusted Counterparty Public
Third Party
New Privacy Model
Identities Transactions Public
As an additional firewall, a new key pair should be used for each transaction to keep them
from being linked to a common owner. Some linking is still unavoidable with multi-input
transactions, which necessarily reveal that their inputs were owned by the same owner. The risk
is that if the owner of a key is revealed, linking could reveal other transactions that belonged to
the same owner.
11. Calculations
We consider the scenario of an attacker trying to generate an alternate chain faster than the honest
chain. Even if this is accomplished, it does not throw the system open to arbitrary changes, such
as creating value out of thin air or taking money that never belonged to the attacker. Nodes are
not going to accept an invalid transaction as payment, and honest nodes will never accept a block
containing them. An attacker can only try to change one of his own transactions to take back
money he recently spent.
The race between the honest chain and an attacker chain can be characterized as a Binomial
Random Walk. The success event is the honest chain being extended by one block, increasing its
lead by +1, and the failure event is the attacker's chain being extended by one block, reducing the
gap by -1.
The probability of an attacker catching up from a given deficit is analogous to a Gambler's
Ruin problem. Suppose a gambler with unlimited credit starts at a deficit and plays potentially an
infinite number of trials to try to reach breakeven. We can calculate the probability he ever
reaches breakeven, or that an attacker ever catches up with the honest chain, as follows [8]:
p = probability an honest node finds the next block
q = probability the attacker finds the next block
q = probability the attacker will ever catch up from z blocks behind
z
{ 1 if p≤q}
q =
z q/pz if pq
6
Given our assumption that p > q, the probability drops exponentially as the number of blocks the
attacker has to catch up with increases. With the odds against him, if he doesn't make a lucky
lunge forward early on, his chances become vanishingly small as he falls further behind.
We now consider how long the recipient of a new transaction needs to wait before being
sufficiently certain the sender can't change the transaction. We assume the sender is an attacker
who wants to make the recipient believe he paid him for a while, then switch it to pay back to
himself after some time has passed. The receiver will be alerted when that happens, but the
sender hopes it will be too late.
The receiver generates a new key pair and gives the public key to the sender shortly before
signing. This prevents the sender from preparing a chain of blocks ahead of time by working on
it continuously until he is lucky enough to get far enough ahead, then executing the transaction at
that moment. Once the transaction is sent, the dishonest sender starts working in secret on a
parallel chain containing an alternate version of his transaction.
The recipient waits until the transaction has been added to a block and z blocks have been
linked after it. He doesn't know the exact amount of progress the attacker has made, but
assuming the honest blocks took the average expected time per block, the attacker's potential
progress will be a Poisson distribution with expected value:
q
=z
p
To get the probability the attacker could still catch up now, we multiply the Poisson density for
each amount of progress he could have made by the probability he could catch up from that point:
∞ ke− { q/pz−k if k≤z}
∑ ⋅
k! 1 if kz
k=0
Rearranging to avoid summing the infinite tail of the distribution...
z ke−
1−∑  1−q/pz−k
k!
k=0
Converting to C code...
#include <math.h>
double AttackerSuccessProbability(double q, int z)
{
double p = 1.0 - q;
double lambda = z * (q / p);
double sum = 1.0;
int i, k;
for (k = 0; k <= z; k++)
{
double poisson = exp(-lambda);
for (i = 1; i <= k; i++)
poisson *= lambda / i;
sum -= poisson * (1 - pow(q / p, z - k));
}
return sum;
}
7
Running some results, we can see the probability drop off exponentially with z.
q=0.1
z=0 P=1.0000000
z=1 P=0.2045873
z=2 P=0.0509779
z=3 P=0.0131722
z=4 P=0.0034552
z=5 P=0.0009137
z=6 P=0.0002428
z=7 P=0.0000647
z=8 P=0.0000173
z=9 P=0.0000046
z=10 P=0.0000012
q=0.3
z=0 P=1.0000000
z=5 P=0.1773523
z=10 P=0.0416605
z=15 P=0.0101008
z=20 P=0.0024804
z=25 P=0.0006132
z=30 P=0.0001522
z=35 P=0.0000379
z=40 P=0.0000095
z=45 P=0.0000024
z=50 P=0.0000006
Solving for P less than 0.1%...
P < 0.001
q=0.10 z=5
q=0.15 z=8
q=0.20 z=11
q=0.25 z=15
q=0.30 z=24
q=0.35 z=41
q=0.40 z=89
q=0.45 z=340
12. Conclusion
We have proposed a system for electronic transactions without relying on trust. We started with
the usual framework of coins made from digital signatures, which provides strong control of
ownership, but is incomplete without a way to prevent double-spending. To solve this, we
proposed a peer-to-peer network using proof-of-work to record a public history of transactions
that quickly becomes computationally impractical for an attacker to change if honest nodes
control a majority of CPU power. The network is robust in its unstructured simplicity. Nodes
work all at once with little coordination. They do not need to be identified, since messages are
not routed to any particular place and only need to be delivered on a best effort basis. Nodes can
leave and rejoin the network at will, accepting the proof-of-work chain as proof of what
happened while they were gone. They vote with their CPU power, expressing their acceptance of
valid blocks by working on extending them and rejecting invalid blocks by refusing to work on
them. Any needed rules and incentives can be enforced with this consensus mechanism.
8
References
[1] W. Dai, "b-money," http://www.weidai.com/bmoney.txt, 1998.
[2] H. Massias, X.S. Avila, and J.-J. Quisquater, "Design of a secure timestamping service with minimal
trust requirements," In 20th Symposium on Information Theory in the Benelux, May 1999.
[3] S. Haber, W.S. Stornetta, "How to time-stamp a digital document," In Journal of Cryptology, vol 3, no
2, pages 99-111, 1991.
[4] D. Bayer, S. Haber, W.S. Stornetta, "Improving the efficiency and reliability of digital time-stamping,"
In Sequences II: Methods in Communication, Security and Computer Science, pages 329-334, 1993.
[5] S. Haber, W.S. Stornetta, "Secure names for bit-strings," In Proceedings of the 4th ACM Conference
on Computer and Communications Security, pages 28-35, April 1997.
[6] A. Back, "Hashcash - a denial of service counter-measure,"
http://www.hashcash.org/papers/hashcash.pdf, 2002.
[7] R.C. Merkle, "Protocols for public key cryptosystems," In Proc. 1980 Symposium on Security and
Privacy, IEEE Computer Society, pages 122-133, April 1980.
[8] W. Feller, "An introduction to probability theory and its applications," 1957.
9

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/IF12405.2-done.pdf
Updated January 14, 2025
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrencies (or crypto) are digital assets exchanged recorded by online platforms, such as crypto exchanges,
and recorded on public distributed ledgers (known as which host users’ custodial or hosted wallets. Exchanges
blockchains) that do not require central intermediaries (e.g., allow users to exchange fiat currency into crypto and vice
commercial banks, central banks) for clearing and versa. These platforms allow users to trade digital assets,
settlement. Transactions are public and users are make markets for various assets, and offer other services.
pseudonymous, so, while transactions are visible to all,
users, whose pseudonyms bear no connection to their true Types of Cryptocurrencies
identities, enjoy a level of secrecy. Initially introduced as The two most widely used cryptocurrencies are Bitcoin and
payments tools, cryptocurrencies are mostly used as a form Ether, which, as of January 2025, represent more than 65%
of investment. This In Focus introduces crypto market of the crypto market capitalization. Bitcoin was the first
structure, regulatory frameworks, and policy issues. For cryptocurrency to gain widespread popularity. In Bitcoin,
more information, see CRS Report R47425, decentralized consensus mechanisms encourage some
Cryptocurrency: Selected Policy Issues. network participants (called miners) to secure the system
for financial gain. Bitcoin relies on a proof of work (PoW)
Cryptocurrencies: An Overview consensus mechanism that rewards miners with greater
Once used by a small subset of computer scientists, crypto computational resources and cheaper energy sources.
has gone global. Crypto has experienced continual, rapid
growth and significant price fluctuations. Between 2021 Ether is the cryptocurrency native to the Ethereum
and 2022, after reaching what was then an all-time high of blockchain. Unlike Bitcoin, Ether uses proof of stake (PoS),
around $3 trillion, the market lost two-thirds of its value a less energy-intensive consensus mechanism than PoW. In
and fell to $800 billion. Since then, the market increased PoS, computational effort of PoW is replaced with
steeply again and is currently valued at $3.46 trillion. collateral: Validators lock or “stake” at least 32 Ether to
enter a pool to be given a chance to validate the next block.
Crypto attempts to replace the trust-based traditional The network may seize collateral for malicious activity or
financial system with one that does not require trust. In lieu other offenses. Ethereum also enables smart contracts,
of traditional financial regulatory staples such as chartering, which are applications that self-execute when participants
supervision, and deposit insurance, the cryptocurrency meet some predetermined set of criteria. Because of the
system leverages cryptography and a series of separate but enhanced programmability, Ethereum is widely used for
concurrent incentives for different system participants, such decentralized finance (or DeFi) projects that aim to mimic
as mining and block rewards. traditional finance but without intermediaries.
In recent years, large financial intermediaries—the very Stablecoins
type of institutions crypto developers sought to obviate— Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ether fluctuate in
have displaced the decentralized, trustless ideal. For value based on market supply and demand. By contrast,
example, crypto was originally accessible via less-than- stablecoins are “designed to maintain a stable value relative
user-friendly blockchains, but more user-friendly and to a national currency or other … assets.” For example, the
familiar systems have been created, allowing individuals Tether and USDC stablecoins are set equal in value to $1.
and firms to “custody” their crypto in accounts or “wallets” Total market capitalization for stablecoins is greater than
at institutions. An entire ecosystem has developed that $200 billion. As with cryptocurrencies, stablecoins are not
supports cryptocurrencies, including the custody or hosting generally accepted for retail payments and are primarily
services known as wallets, as well as exchanges, payment used when trading crypto. Stablecoins may attempt to
platforms, decentralized finance platforms, and more. match their value to equivalent fiat currencies in different
ways but have been known to lose their stable values. For
Transacting with Crypto more, see CRS In Focus IF11968, Stablecoins: Background
Users may interact with crypto via on-chain transactions, and Policy Issues.
which are processed over a blockchain, a network of nodes
that maintain the system. Users send and receive Central Bank Digital Currency
cryptocurrency on-chain using unhosted wallets that store The premise of central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) is
the keys that secure ownership of and permit transaction of that issuing and managing a digital currency by a central
crypto. Assets on a blockchain are protected by asymmetric bank may realize at least some of the anticipated benefits of
key cryptography, which encrypts and protects data. cryptocurrencies but with greater efficiency and fewer risks.
For example, CBDCs could be used for payments, much the
Off-chain transactions occur outside of blockchains. way crypto was intended. However, CBDCs would be legal
Instead, they are generally facilitated, processed, and tender and exist as dollars themselves instead of having
https://crsreports.congress.gov
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
values linked to dollars. Currently, there are no plans for a more information, see CRS In Focus IF12320, Crypto and
U.S. CBDC, but other countries have introduced or are in Banking: Policy Issues.
the process of introducing their own. For more, see CRS In
Applicable Money Services Business Framework
Focus IF11471, Central Bank Digital Currencies.
Cryptocurrency exchanges often register as money services
businesses (MSBs) in order to operate. The regulatory
Crypto Regulation
framework for MSBs is largely a state-based licensing
There is no comprehensive regulatory framework for
regime and applies to many nonbank institutions, including
crypto, and regulators have issued few rules specific to
several crypto-related companies, including exchanges and
crypto. In the absence of an overarching framework,
crypto automated teller machines. At the federal level, these
regulators may apply existing regulatory frameworks as
crypto firms are considered MSBs and must register with
circumstances dictate. It is possible that crypto may be
the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network and comply
subject to various existing regulatory frameworks
with the Bank Secrecy Act and implement anti-money
depending in part on regulatory interpretation, the specific
laundering (AML) and know-your-customer (KYC)
crypto product, how it is used, and what it is used for.
programs. For more, see CRS Report R46486, Telegraphs,
Steamships, and Virtual Currency: An Analysis of Money
Applicable SEC Framework
Transmitter Regulation.
Some policymakers believe that “many of the tokens
trading on these [crypto trading] platforms may well meet
Selected Policy Issues
the definition of ‘securities,’” which would require both the
Congress is divided on whether policy should foster, ignore,
tokens and platforms to register with the Securities and
or quarantine the crypto industry, raising some policy
Exchange Commission (SEC) and become subject to SEC
issues. Policymakers generally debate how to cultivate
regulation, absent an exemption. In several cases, the SEC
innovation while minimizing crypto’s potential harms.
has used the Howey test to determine whether
cryptocurrencies qualify as securities. Under that test, an Future of regulation. Traditional financial institutions are
instrument is deemed an “investment contact” (a category subject to an array of regulations, such as prudential
of security) if it involves (1) the investment of money (2) in standards and disclosure requirements. Historically, the
a common enterprise (3) with a reasonable expectation of crypto industry has exhibited non-compliance with and
profits and (4) to be derived from the efforts of others. For uneven enforcement of applicable frameworks. Potential
more, see CRS Report R46208, Digital Assets and SEC future crypto regulation may choose to implement rules that
Regulation. resemble the traditional financial system.
Applicable CFTC Framework The regulatory policy debate has focused on whether a
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) regulatory regime that is tailored for crypto is necessary.
administers the Commodity Exchange Act, which defines Other key policy issues can be summed up in three
commodities as various agricultural products and natural unanswered questions: Are current regulatory authorities
resources—such as gold, oil, wheat, and cotton—as well as sufficient, or is congressional action required? If new
services and rights in which futures may be dealt. In 2015 regulatory authority is required, who should be the primary
the agency brought an enforcement action against a Bitcoin regulator? Is it better to create a new, overarching structure,
options and futures platform, concluding that Bitcoin and or is a refinement of the existing framework sufficient?
other virtual currencies are “commodities.” Various federal
Several bills regarding crypto were introduced in the 118th
court decisions have since supported the CFTC’s position
Congress addressing these issues. They include House-
that the act’s definition of the term commodity encompasses
passed H.R. 4763, the Financial Innovation and Technology
virtual currency. Entities offering trading of crypto futures
for the 21st Century Act, and H.R. 4766, the Clarity for
and options must register with the CFTC, whose authority
Payment Stablecoins Act of 2023.
in spot (cash) markets is limited to enforcing prohibitions
on fraud and manipulation. Privacy vs. illicit activity. The same characteristics that
address a legitimate desire for privacy also provides secrecy
Applicable Banking Framework
that makes it useful for engaging in illicit activity.
Bank involvement with crypto can fall into three categories.
Balancing the potential privacy provided by crypto’s
First, banks can provide traditional banking services, such
pseudonymity with the requirement that financial firms
as lending and deposit taking, to crypto firms. Second,
comply with AML/KYC programs is a key policy issue.
banks can provide crypto services, such as payment
applications and tokenization. Third, crypto firms can seek Energy and the environment. The Bitcoin network’s
to acquire banks or bank charters. Federal bank annual energy consumption has recently been estimated to
involvement in crypto activities faces a two-prong be about 180 terawatt hours, or somewhat more than the
regulatory test. First, an activity must be permissible under amount of energy used by Egypt. For more, see CRS Report
law—Congress has limited banks’ activities related or R45863, Bitcoin, Blockchain, and the Energy Sector.
incidental to the business of banking. Second, an activity
must be safe and sound. Consumer and investor protection. Some argue that
numerous scams and frauds—embodied by the 2022
Crypto firms may seek federal bank charters from the collapse of crypto firm FTX—highlight a lack of investor
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to provide and consumer protections in the industry.
limited crypto services. Various states, including New York
and Wyoming, have established frameworks in which
Paul Tierno, Analyst in Financial Economics
crypto firms may obtain special state banking charters. For
https://crsreports.congress.gov
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
IF12405
Disclaimer
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress.
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.
https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF12405 · VERSION 2 · UPDATED

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/5work1061done.pdf
BIS Working Papers
No 1061
Cryptocurrencies and
Decentralized Finance
by Igor Makarov and Antoinette Schoar
Monetary and Economic Department
December 2022
JEL classification: G12, G15, F38.
Keywords: Decentralized finance, blockchain
technology, financial intermediation, system risk.
BIS Working Papers are written by members of the Monetary and Economic
Department of the Bank for International Settlements, and from time to time by other
economists, and are published by the Bank. The papers are on subjects of topical
interest and are technical in character. The views expressed in them are those of their
authors and not necessarily the views of the BIS.
This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org).
© Bank for International Settlements 2022. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be
reproduced or translated provided the source is stated.
ISSN 1020-0959 (print)
ISSN 1682-7678 (online)
Foreword
The 21st BIS Annual Conference took place in Basel, Switzerland, on 24 June 2022.
The event brought together a distinguished group of central bank Governors, leading
academics and former public officials to exchange views on the topic “Central banking
after the pandemic: challenges ahead”. The papers presented at the conference are
released as BIS Working Papers, nos 1060, 1061, 1062 and 1063.
BIS Papers no 131 contains panel remarks by Lael Brainard (Vice Chair, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System), Stefan Ingves (Governor, Sveriges
Riksbank) and Eddie Yue (Chief Executive, Hong Kong Monetary Authority).
WP1061 Cryptocurrencies and Decentralised Finance (DeFi) i
Contents
Foreword ....................................................................................................................................................... i
Cryptocurrencies and Decentralised Finance (DeFi)
by Antoinette Schoar ............................................................................................................................. 1
Discussion by Tobias Adrian ............................................................................................................ 67
Previous volumes ................................................................................................................................... 72
WP1061 Cryptocurrencies and Decentralised Finance (DeFi) iii
Cryptocurrencies and Decentralized
Finance (DeFi)
Igor Makarov1 and Antoinette Schoar∗2
1London School of Economics
2MIT Sloan, NBER and CEPR
April 24, 2022
Abstract
Thepaperprovidesanoverviewofcryptocurrenciesanddecentralizedfinance.
The discussion lays out potential benefits and challenges of the new system and
presents a comparison to the traditional system of financial intermediation. Our
analysis highlights that while the DeFi architecture might have the potential
to reduce transaction costs, similar to the traditional financial system, there
are several layers where rents can accumulate due to endogenous constraints to
competition. WeshowthatthepermissionlessandpseudonymousdesignofDeFi
generates challenges for enforcing tax compliance, anti-money laundering laws,
and preventing financial malfeasance. We highlight ways to regulate the DeFi
system which would preserve a majority of benefits of the underlying blockchain
architecture but support accountability and regulatory compliance.
∗Igor Makarov: Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK. Email: i.makarov@lse.ac.uk. An-
toinetteSchoar: 62-638,100MainStreet,CambridgeMA02138,USA.Email: aschoar@mit.edu. This
paper was originally presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference on March
24, 2022. We thank the editor Janice Eberly, and our discussants Gary Gorton and Eswar Prasad for
extensive comments that improved the paper. We thank Daniel Ferreira for helpful comments. We
also thank Jiageng Liu, Yuou Wu, and Xin Xiong for excellent research assistance.
1
The financial system performs a wide array of functions that are important for eco-
nomic growth and stability, such as allocating resources to their most productive use,
moving capital from agents with surpluses to those with deficits, and providing efficient
meansformovingwealthacrosstimeandstates, seeforexampleMerton(1995)orAllen
et al. (2019). To achieve these goals, the US financial system, and similarly most other
countries, have traditionally relied on a set of intermediaries such as banks, brokers,
exchanges etc. that are connected by payment systems. These intermediaries serve as
centralized nodes that guard the access to the financial system and provide customers
with essential services such as record keeping, verification of transactions, settlement,
liquidity, and security. This architecture implies that intermediaries perform many of
the core functions in the system, and also help with the implementation of regulatory
goals such as tax reporting, anti-money-laundering laws or consumer financial protec-
tion. As a result, however, these intermediaries can hold significant power, based on
their preferential access to customers and data. This centralized position, if not prop-
erly harnessed and regulated, can be a source of outsized economic rents and can lead
to considerable inefficiencies. It can also lead to inherent fragility and systematic risk
if core intermediaries become corrupted or investors lose trust in the system.
The concern about the power and potential corruptibility or fragility of intermedi-
aries, possibly heightened by the experience of the 2008 financial crisis, has contributed
to the new “revolution” brought about by the blockchain technology, which is one of
the fastest growing financial innovations over the last decade. Its attraction lies in the
ability to build decentralized and open access platforms that reduce the reliance on
centralized trusted intermediaries and middlemen.
Eliminating unnecessary intermediaries can potentially be a significant benefit of
the blockchain architecture. Technological innovations have, of course, long been con-
sequential in improving the efficiency of the financial system or strengthening compe-
tition. We can think of innovations like mobile banking or algorithmic lending. What
differentiates the blockchain from past technological innovations is that it offers the
possibility of a completely different financial architecture, commonly called decentral-
ized finance (DeFi), where record keeping is decentralized, access to the system is
anonymous and unrestricted, and any form of intermediation would be built on top of
it.1
To assess the potential benefits and challenges of the proposed new architecture, it
isimportantto recognize thatintermediaries arenotmerelygatekeepers whichhaveno
economic value except for rent extraction. Many problems with existing intermediaries
1DeFi is also distinct from the generic umbrella term of “Fintech”. While Fintech innovations
also introduce new technologies to financial services, for example Rocket Mortgage which uses on-line
origination in mortgage lending, they still rely on a model of centralized intermediaries.
1
originate from the economic forces that are an inherent part of financial markets and
therefore, equally exist in DeFi solutions, but might be relocated to different layers in
the new infrastructure as we will discuss. In addition, some of the rents that financial
institutions enjoy in the current financial system, are a deliberate regulatory choice: In
order to provide institutions with the incentives to abide by regulations, rule-makers
allow these institutions to earn some rents to ensure that they have a franchise value.
Advocates of DeFi solutions argue that financial services are ripe to undergo dra-
matic and disruptive changes. How this evolves, in terms of technology, regulation,
and ultimately liquidity and credit to the economy, has important consequences for
the US and global economies. There are also strategic and competitive implications
across countries. The goal of this paper is to raise some of the issues that arise in a
system of Decentralized Finance and propose some solutions, while at the same time
providing an introduction to how such a system works and the mechanics behind it.
We start by laying out how the blockchain technology works that underpins vir-
tually all DeFi solutions. We discuss the different ways security is achieved under
different protocols, in particular Proof of Work (PoW) and Proof of Stake (PoS), and
what economic incentives are built into these solutions to ensure the integrity of the
blockchain ledger. Our analysis highlights that the current security protocols have
in-built economic incentives for concentration of mining or validator capacity due to
inherent fixed costs and benefits of co-insurance for validators. We also show that
large PoW networks can have negative externalities on the security of smaller PoW
networks that has important implication for the competitiveness of PoW protocols.
For PoS platforms, an added complexity arises from the fact that the going concern
value of the platform also affects the security of the platform itself and applications
that run on it.
Next, we discuss the benefits and limitations of smart contracts. These are self-
executing pieces of scripting code that can in theory carry out any computation and
are the building blocks of many DeFi applications. Since smart contracts are designed
not to have recourse to the legal system, they have to be written as complete contracts
upfront. We highlight the implication of such a change in the enforcement of contracts
on the transaction costs of writing contracts, the opportunity of opting out of current
remedial laws, and challenges for consumer financial protection if smart contracts are
written outside typical legal protections. Many of these challenges might give rise to
a new layer of “trusted” intermediaries, in particular coders who will help people to
navigate the DeFi infrastructure that might be too complicated for individual par-
ticipants. In this context, we explain the role and design of Oracles, which provide
access to data from outside the blockchain and allow smart contracts to interact with
2
the real world. Based on these building blocks we then provide an overview of the
current crypto landscape and the main DeFi applications such as decentralized crypto
exchanges, borrowing and lending markets, and yield farming.
Finally, we compare this new DeFi architecture to traditional financial market so-
lutions and lay out how these two regimes solve some of the most important problems
in financial systems, such as data privacy and transparency, extraction of rents, trans-
actions costs, governance issues and systemic risk.2
DeFiapplicationsmighthavethepotentialtodemocratizefinancebycreatingalevel
playing field among providers of financial products and services. But we show that the
current design of DeFi applications, which are predominantly built on permissionless
and pseudonymous blockchains generates formidable challenges for tax enforcement,
aggravates issues of money laundering and other kinds of financial malfeasance, and
as a result creates negative externalities on the rest of the economy. Similar to the
traditionalfinancialsystem,thereareseveralnaturalpointswhererentscanaccumulate
atdifferentlayersintheDeFiarchitectureduetoendogenousconstraintstocompetition
caused by network externalities and economies of scale. Also, rent extraction can
be driven by frictions at the customer level due to lack of financial sophistication or
behavioralbiases. Incaseswheremarketcompetitiondoesnotworktorestrictexcessive
rents, typically regulations are used to protect the interest of users. But here again
the permissionless and pseudonymous design, severely limits the ability of regulators
to restrict unscrupulous operators.
The pseudonymous and permissionless structure also has implications for the gov-
ernance of DeFi apps. Many DeFi apps in their quest to avoid placing trust in any
actor or institution have experimented with new organizational forms, so-called decen-
tralized autonomous organization (DAO). The basic idea of DAO is to spread control
over decisions among all interested stakeholders by issuing special “governance” tokens
that give their holders the power to propose changes to the protocol and vote on them.
We discuss the governance challenges that arise in such arrangements, and show that
they face the same fundamental governance issues as traditional organizations. As a
result, we show that in the majority of crypto projects ownership is concentrated.
Lastly, we discuss the potential of DeFi solutions to contribute to systemic risk and
have spillover effects on the rest of the economy. We highlight that DeFi so far has
operated under a narrow banking model. This removes many of the problems faced by
the fractional reserve system, but also constrains the efficient use of capital. Presently,
the main systemic risk comes from the ability of investors to take highly leveraged and
2Harveyetal.(2021), Sch¨ar(2021), Aramonteetal.(2021)alsoprovidedetaileddiscussionsofthe
DeFi eco-system and its applications.
3
interconnected positions and a potential run on stablecoins. So far, the systemic risk
has been limited, but as ties between the regular financial system and DeFi increase
the risk can grow.
We conclude by discussing challenges and potential solutions for regulators and
market participants in this new infrastructure. A natural place for regulatory oversight
in this new ecosystem is at the level of developers and validators, which in turn control
the network protocol. Once this level of regulatory compliance is established, many
otherfunctionscanbebuiltthatwouldaddressthemajorityofissuesweoutlinedabove.
This solution looks similar to a permissioned blockchain, but it preserves most of the
desired properties of the blockchain such as observability of transactions, automatic
settlement, and execution of the same set of smart contracts.
If regulators give up on the ability to oversee validators, the effectiveness of reg-
ulation will be much more limited and will depend on the goodwill and voluntary
cooperation of validators and developers of the blockchain. If validators accept trans-
actions from every party, the most regulators could hope for is to separate the network
into“regulated”and“unregulated”parts. Thelatterpartcouldthenharborbadactors
and facilitate illegal activities. The opportunities of sidestepping the regulated part
will generally increase with the level of crypto-adoption, since people will be able to
predominately transact in the unregulated part and avoid triggering regulatory over-
sight.
1. Blockchain technology
A typical financial system can be represented, at an abstract level, as a collection
of states and transactions that describe the transition from one state to another. For
example, in a payment system a state is a collection of all the accounts in the system
together with their balances. Transactions specify how funds move between accounts.
Historically, financial intermediaries have been the key nodes in the financial sys-
tem that control the accuracy of customer accounts, perform bookkeeping functions
and ensure that unauthorized persons do not have access to an account. For a long
time, this centralized model of bookkeeping was the only viable option. But recent ad-
vances in technology have enabled an alternative architecture of storing and managing
information where no single entity has full control over all the states and transactions,
or any subset of them. Instead, multiple parties (validators) hold their own copies of
states and jointly decide which transactions are admissible. This architecture became
known as Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT). A blockchain is a form of DLT, in
which all transactions are recorded and organized in blocks that are linked together
4
using cryptography. Bitcoin was the first and remains the most famous application of
the blockchain technology.
One of the main advantages of DLT is the elimination of a central point of failure.
Since multiple copies of records exist, the corruption of a single node or a single copy
has no effect on the security of the blockchain. In fact, the blockchain protocol allows
for multiple points of failure or corruption as long as the majority of validators are
not corrupted. In particular, it allows validators to be parties that do not trust one
another or are even adversaries.
Blockchains are usually divided into permissioned and permissionless ledgers de-
pending on the set of entities that are allowed to be validators. In a permissioned
blockchain, a set of validators is approved by a coordinating body, which can be a
private firm or a consortium of institutions. In contrast, a permissionless blockchain
does not impose ex ante constraints on the number or identity of validators. In addi-
tion, blockchains are sometimes categorized as private or public ledgers. In a public
blockchain, everyone has full access to the information stored on the blockchain. In
contrast, only authorized parties can observe transactions in private blockchains. Typ-
ically, permissioned blockchains are private, and permissionless blockchains are public.
Permissioned blockchains still require trust in the coordinating body that approves
validators, which is viewed by many crypto enthusiasts as a fundamental flaw. In
contrast, permissionless blockchains do not rely on trust in any individual validator,
forming what famously has been called a “trustless” trust architecture. The “trustless”
trust, however, comes at a high cost. Since anyone can become a validator in a per-
missionless blockchain, the system is potentially vulnerable to a Sybil attack where an
adversary subverts the system by creating a large number of pseudonymous validators
and uses them to gain disproportionately large influence over the consensus protocol.
Twomainapproacheshavebeenproposedforpermissionlessprotocolstoberesilient
to a Sybil attack, (1) Proof-of-Work (PoW) and (2) Proof-of-Stake (PoS). The main
idea behind both approaches for validating transactions is to provide validators with
a reward for their services and to make it costly for an adversary to attain a majority
stake and subvert the system. The reward is meant to provide validators with financial
incentives to work honestly. The reward usually comes in two forms: transaction fees
and a pre-specified amount also known as a block reward. The block reward is typically
denominated in the platform’s native currency and is financed through issuance of new
coins, thus serving as a dilution tax on all users.
The decentralization of the ledger also has implications for the scalability of the
network. Intuitively, as the ledger becomes more decentralized more copies need to be
distributed and more resources need to be spent to achieve the protocol consensus and
5
make the blockchain secure. This trade-off between decentralization, security, and scal-
ability was famously formulated by Vitalik Buterin, a co-founder of Ethereum, in the
early days of Ethereum and became known as the scalability trilemma (or sometimes
as the blockchain trilemma). The trilemma has attracted a lot of attention and a large
number of new blockchain solutions have being introduced to achieve simultaneously
the three goals.3
In the following, we leave aside the technical issues such as scalability. We also
refrain from a game-theoretic analysis of security of different protocols. For an example
of such analysis see Biais et al. (2019) and Halaburda et al. (2021). Instead we focus on
theembeddedeconomicmechanismsandincentivesthatareattheheartofthedifferent
protocol security approaches. Since most DeFi applications are currently built on
permissionless blockchains we will focus predominantly on these blockchains. We show
that both PoW and PoS favor validator concentration, since there are strong implicit
incentivesforvalidatorstopooltheircapacityandco-insuretheirriskofwinningablock
reward. We also discuss the resilience of PoW and PoS to an attack and show that
large existing networks have negative externality on small networks. These properties
have important implications for competition in the crypto space which we discuss in
Section 4.
1.1. PoW protocols
In a PoW protocol such as Bitcoin, validators (also known as miners) compete for
the right to verify transactions and obtain their reward by solving a computationally
intensive problem. For a successful attack on a blockchain an attacker needs to control
a large fraction of the total network power, typically 51%, which resulted in the nick-
name “51% attack”. Once an attacker controls the majority of mining power they can
alter transactions in the system, for example, they can spend the same cryptocurrency
multiple times (known as a double-spending attack).
The likelihood of an attack in a PoW protocol, therefore, depends on the prospects
that a malevolent party amasses enough computing power. Notice that miners should
at least break even in the long-run to be willing to invest in mining. Therefore, the
expected rewards collected for mining a block should cover the cost of its mining. This
implies that there are no economic disincentives of amassing 51% and the constraint is
on the feasibility of amassing 51% of hashing power, Budish (2018).4
3These include sharding, sidechains, and lightning networks. There are also non-blockchain solu-
tions, e.g., hashgraph technologies.
4Hashingpowerorhashrateistheprimarymeasureofaminer’sperformanceinaPoWprotocols.
See https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Hashrate for more details.
6
Of course, any successful attack on a blockchain reduces trust in this blockchain,
and therefore, its economic value. If miners have to incur large fixed costs to set up
their operations, then by attacking the blockchain they will forfeit some of the future
profits and might not be able to recover their initial investments. This reduces the
benefits of the attack and therefore, can make it unprofitable.
Therefore, the lower the fixed costs, the less costly is a 51% attack. As a result,
any factors that reduce fixed costs have negative effects on the security of the network.
In particular, large PoW networks like Bitcoin or Ethereum have negative externalities
on the security of smaller PoW networks.
The large appreciation of Bitcoin and Ethereum led to significant investments in
mining capacity. Smaller networks like Litecoin or Bitcoin Gold usually attract only a
small fraction of the mining capacity of these larger coins, since their rewards also are
much lower. This creates a possibility that a miner with a large hashing capacity can
divert a fraction of it to attack a smaller coin, if they chose to.
Furthermore, the emergence of market places like NiceHash, where mining hash
power can be rented for a specific time period, has made it possible for people to
speculate on mining profitability without owning the physical hardware themselves
and amass hashing power for a possible attack. The amount of available hashing
power in these market places is only a small fraction of the capacity used in large
networks such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, which usually operate close to full capacity.
But the available capacity on NiceHash, often is significantly larger than the total
mining capacity employed in smaller networks.5 These renting opportunities have
significantly reduced the cost of a 51% attack on smaller networks, and in fact have led
to many such attacks on smaller cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin SV (BSV), Bitcoin
Gold (BTG), and Ethereum Classic (ETC), see Table A.1 in the Appendix.
ThenegativeexternalitiesoflargePoWnetworksonsmallernetworkshasimportant
implications for the competitiveness of PoW protocols. It suggests that once one or
a few major PoW blockchains are in existence, new entrants might find it difficult
to compete. While the new protocol has not reached a critical mass yet, it has a
heightened likelihood of being subject to an attack. This makes it less less secure
and therefore, might reinforce the dominant position of the first movers. One defense
against the negative externalities of hashing capacity in larger blockchains would be to
make mining equipment very platform specific, so that slack in a larger system does
not affect the new entrant. However, platform specific mining hardware can increase
entry cost for miners to the new platform and therefore, can have negative effect on its
5See, for example, the website Crypto51 https://www.crypto51.app/ that measures the cost to
51% attack Bitcoin and other major proof of work cryptocurrencies.
7
growth and security.
While there have not been any successful 51% attacks on Bitcoin or Ethereum, it
does not mean that they are completely safe from it. First, as we mentioned above,
these networks have benefited so far from large price appreciation that have made
miners operate at nearly full capacity. If at some point there is a substantial price
decline it is likely that an increasing number of miners will find it unprofitable to
continue their mining operations. This can lead to an increase in spare mining renting
capacity, and therefore, might increase the probability of an attack.
Second, the original design of Satoshi Nakamoto, the inventor of Bitcoin, envisioned
a world where mining would be fully decentralized and not depend on a few large
players. In this world, miners would find it difficult to collude and failure of any one
miner would have no consequence for the security of the network.
This original idea, however, clashes with the economics of mining in PoW proto-
cols. By design, the probability of winning the race and obtaining the block reward is
proportional to the computing power spent on mining. This gives strong incentives for
miners to pool their computing power and co-insure each other. As a result, mining in
most PoW blockchains is dominated by large mining pools, Cong et al. (2020), Ferreira
et al. (2019).
The concentration of mining pools has attracted a lot of public attention and con-
cern, since high concentration facilitates collusion among miners and with it the danger
of an attack. Even if miners themselves do not misbehave, high concentration increases
the risk that a malevolent party, either a private or a state actor, could hijack them
and gain control over the network.
Some observers downplayed the risk of the attack coming from pool concentration
arguing that even though pools can have substantial influence over the cryptocurrency
protocol, they do not necessarily control their miners. Therefore, if any pool is noticed
to engage in rogue behavior its miners can leave it and join other pools.
The power that a pool operator has vis a vis individual miners depends on the
ease with which miners can shift capacity across pools, which in turn depends on the
underlying size distribution of the miners. Makarov and Schoar (2021) document that
miner concentration in the Bitcoin protocol is high, even at the level of individual
miners. They show that at times fewer than 50 miners control 50% of mining capacity.
One explanation for this concentration in mining power seems to lie with the high fixed
costs of setting up a large mining farm that result in increasing returns to scale.
The paper also shows that the concentration of mining capacity is counter cyclical
and varies with the Bitcoin price. It decreases following sharp increases in the Bitcoin
price and increases in periods when the price drops. Thus, the risk of a 51% attack
8
increases when the Bitcoin price drops and makes the system more fragile.
1.2. PoS protocols
While the costs of an attack and the resilience of a PoW network increase with
the size of the network so does the cost of verification. According to the Cambridge
Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index, the annual electricity consumption of the Bit-
coin network in 2021 reached 130TWh, which exceeds the annual consumption of such
countries as Norway or the Ukraine. Because miners have to be compensated for their
costs large electricity consumption translates into high transaction fees. Figure 1 shows
the average transaction fees in the two largest PoW protocols, Bitcoin and Ethereum.
As the Bitcoin and Ethereum prices have significantly increased over time and so have
the fees.
[Fig. 1 About Here]
The serious concerns about the sustainability and energy consumption of PoW
protocols have favored the emergence of PoS blockchains. PoS protocols consume
significantly fewer resources than PoW protocols. Platt et al. (2021) estimate energy
consumption of major PoS protocols and show that their energy consumption per
transaction is comparable to that in the Visa network. Recognizing the drawbacks of
PoW protocols, after 2017 there was a significant acceleration in the development of
PoS blockchains Also, Ethereum instituted a shift to a PoS protocol, Ethereum 2.0
(Eth2), to be completed in 2022.
In a PoS protocol, instead of solving a difficult mathematical problem a validator
stakes its coins, which can be forfeited if the validator fails to verify transactions in a
timely manner or its actions are determined to be malicious. In most PoS protocols,
participants who stake more coins are more likely to be chosen to verify transactions
(or have more rights to vote for a validator in delegated PoS networks). Thus, PoS
protocols are built on the idea that a party that has a large stake in the given network
would not want to undermine this network since the gains from an attack would not
compensateforthelossofvaluethatcomesfrompenaltiesandthedropinthenetwork’s
valuation.
The above argument relies on the idea that a validator which owns a large stake
in the platform also has an interest in its continuation value and thus should be disin-
centivized from endangering it. This logic makes sense, if the attack in question is, for
example, a double-spending attack, since the gains in that case are a small fraction of
the total value of the network.
9
However, the gains from an attack might not be restricted to simple gains from
double-spending. First, if the network is part of a competitive environment, competing
networks might realize substantial gains from undermining a new entrant. Similarly to
what we described in PoW blockchains, here as well undermining fledgling rivals can
be particularly profitable if it reduces future competition.
Second, many PoS blockchains are smart contract platforms that position them-
selves as a base layer that provides security for other applications or even other
blockchains that are built on it. In this case, there is tension between the value of
the base layer blockchain and its applications. If the value of the base layer is below
the value of an application, an attacker who wants to undermine the application might
find it profitable to attack the base layer. To prevent such an attack the value of
the blockchain at the base layer should be substantially greater than the value of its
applications. Since the value of the base layer comes primarily from transaction fees
(and seignorage), the possibility of an attack on the base layer puts a lower bound on
the required size of the fees that have to accrue to the blockchain at the base layer.
High fees, however, hurt the value of applications built on the platform, and thus the
platform’s value.
We showed in Section 1.1 that mining in PoW blockchains is dominated by pools
because they allow miners to co-insure each other. A similar force is at play in PoS
blockchains. Since the probability of being chosen and collecting the reward depends
on the amount of coins a validator is staking, investors have incentives to pool their
stakes together and co-insure each other.
Table 1 documents concentration of validators for the largest PoS protocols as of
January 2022. The data shows significant concentration for the vast majority of the
PoS blockchains. The top 10 validators hold typically more than 25% of the capacity,
while the top 50 validator are above 50%.
In addition, since the technology used across different PoS protocols shares many
similarities the same validators typically work on multiple blockchains. Table 2 shows
the top 15 validators together with their combined stakes in the top 10 largest PoS
protocols. The top 10, 50, 100 validators account for 14%, 32%, and 41% of stakes
across the 10 largest PoS blockchains, respectively.
The concentration of PoS validators as of now is lower than in the PoW protocols,
but it is not fully dispersed either. It is of interest that a few validators are starting to
emerge as dominant players across different blockchains.
10
2. Smart contracts
Smart contracts have become another fundamental layer of the new DeFi architec-
ture. To go beyond simple interactions such as the transfer of coins or assets on the
blockchain, many newer protocols starting from Ethereum provide the opportunity to
embed pieces of scripting code that can in theory carry out any computation. These
pieces of code became known as “smart contracts”. The name and the concept are
credited to the cryptographer Nick Szabo who defined smart contracts in 1994 as “a
set of promises, specified in digital form, including protocols within which the parties
perform on these promises”. The modern implementation of this idea arrived with
the creation of Ethereum, which is designed to execute smart contracts and makes it
convenient for developers to build applications on top of the blockchain.6
By itself using software code to represent and execute contractual agreements is
not new. For example, when trading via an online brokerage platform, each time a
customer sets up a limit order that automatically buys certain stocks when prices
match a predefined level, the contract is executed by a software program. Financial
markets or e-commerce are dominated by these types of arrangements since they allow
a large volume of transactions to be executed quickly and efficiently. But even if the
program automatically executes a set of tasks, in traditional electronic contracts, the
parties to the contract still have recourse to the legal system if there is a dispute. For
example, if a limit order is executed based on wrong information used by the online
brokerage platform, the client can seek restitution from the brokerage through the
courts.
The critical differences, from an economic perspective, between traditional elec-
tronicarrangementsandsmartcontractsthatareexecutedonapermissionlessblockchain,
arise from how the contracts are executed and enforced.7 We show since smart con-
tracts are self-executing once they have been embedded in the blockchain, they require
contracting parties to complete contracts as much as possible ex ante, since they can-
not rely on the ex post remedial protections through the legal system. We discuss the
implications of this switch for the transactions costs of writing contracts, the ability of
contracting parties to opt out of the current legal protections, and the constraints to
consumer financial protections. The need to import up-to-date information from the
outside (off-chain) world into the blockchain also led to the development of a new set of
entities, so-called oracles. We lay out their role for the functioning of smart contracts
6See Ethereum White Paper, https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/.
7Smartcontractscanalsobeimplementedonpermissionedblockchains. Inthispaper,wefocuson
smart contracts run on permissionless and public blockchain protocols, since their major applications
have been hosted on such blockchains.
11
and potential vulnerabilities that are introduced through oracles. Finally, we argue
that this new architecture might require contracting parties to rely on a new set of
trusted intermediaries, such as the developers of the smart contract platform or coders
that help to write the computer programs that will be executed on the blockchain.
2.1. Execution and enforcement
The execution of a smart contract on a permissionless blockchain fundamentally
changes the process of enforcement, see Werbach and Cornell (2017), Werbach (2018).
First, once a program has been executed, the distributed nature of the contract verifi-
cation makes it impossible to unilaterally stop or reverse its execution, unless certain
conditions for stopping the smart contract were included in the program ex ante. Sec-
ond, even if one party wanted to sue a counterparty, there might not be any party
that can be held accountable because of the anonymity of the transactions. Practically
speaking there might be no one who can be served with a legal notice.
These changes are important for the application of contract law, since it is fun-
damentally a remedial institution that operates on an ex-post basis. First, contract
law aims to rectify situations ex post, where one party has wronged another party by
breaching the terms of the contract or not delivering on a promised action.
Second, the law incorporates a variety of doctrines, which allow one or multiple
parties to annul the contract ex post. These exemptions are meant to protect con-
tracting parties against unwittingly (or deliberately) taking advantage of each other
or of an unforeseen situation. These are issues such as unconscionability, mutual mis-
take, illegality, capacity, consideration, fraud, or duress. The role of judges and the
legal system then is to oversee and enforce the intended application of the law in these
cases. In other words, the role of the legal system is to complete contracts that were
either deliberately or unintentionally left incomplete ex ante, see Wright and De Filippi
(2015).
Of course, contracts are written in the shadow of the law. The expectations that
contracting parties have about how laws will get enforced, affect how contracts are
writteninthefirst place, andwhichpartscanbe leftunspecified. Since smartcontracts
do not allow for recourse to the legal system, they have to be written as complete
contracts upfront. Or at a minimum the contracting parties have to specify exactly
which states of the world they are willing to leave unspecified. Since the smart contract
cannot be unilaterally stopped and renegotiated, if a state of the world is not ex ante
specified, the program will execute as if this state never existed.
This example highlights that a contract breach in the traditional sense is not possi-
12
bleontheblockchain. Oncetheparametersencodedinthesmartcontractsarerealized,
thecodewillexecutethetransaction. Thissignificantlyreducesthechanceofoneparty
to a contract reneging on it after the fact, say because they changed their mind or they
were not serious about the transaction in the first place. But the automatic execution
of smart contracts also eliminates the opportunity for “efficient breach”. Take the sit-
uation of a mutual mistake, where a buyer and seller agreed to the purchase of an asset
ataspecificprice. Butjustbeforethesellerissupposedtodelivertheasset, sherealizes
that the asset is worth much more than either side had realized. Here, in a traditional
contracting situation, the seller could engage in “efficient breach” and not deliver the
asset until both side had a chance to renegotiate the terms of the deal. However, with
a smart contract the transfer will be executed, since the parties by definition did not
plan for the mutual mistake upfront. And a similar logic holds for many of the other
protections that traditional contract law awards. This shifts the status quo of which
parties will be in the role of plaintiff and defendant.8
2.2. Smart contract trade-offs
2.2.1. Transaction costs of contracting
As the discussion above highlights smart contracts must be written in precise, fully
defined computer code since they cannot be modified once executed. Many proponents
of smart contracts have suggested that this reduces their cost, since there is no scope
for ex post renegotiation. But these cost savings might be offset by the higher upfront
costs of negotiating and specifying the precise terms of an agreement in all possible
states of the world. These up-front costs will become especially high when there is
large uncertainty about the future states of the world or if these states are hard to
imagine and to define ex ante.
To mitigate these issues, traditional contract law systems provide a series of manda-
tory and default positions that allocate risk when matters are left unspecified. In the
case of smart contracts this default to the legal system is not possible. So, the costs
must be borne by the individuals engaging in the contract. In the case of contracts,
which are very simple and standardizable, some templates of code will most likely be
developed that anyone can use to embed in a smart contract. This can reduce the up-
front cost in cases where many people have very similar contract issues and the future
states and outcomes over which the contract needs to be defined are also very standard
8Partiestoasmartcontractcouldtryputtinginprotectionsagainstmutualmistakesbywritinginto
the contract arbitration of third party experts, but this would require trust in experts and therefore,
would go against the main idea of smart contracts.
13
and simple to understand. However, as soon as there is more variation in possible
contract templates that can be considered in a contracting situation, the mental cost
of comparing and understanding the different options might become quite high. And
of course, the costs are even higher if the situation is unique, and a lot of value is at
stake. Here parties cannot choose from existing templates but have a strong incentive
to not inadvertently miss or miscode a possible state of the world. This means they
do have to bear the upfront costs of trying to write as complete a contract as possible.
2.2.2. Smart contracts as a commitment device
Even people who trust the legal system might in some situations want to avoid ex
post litigation risk to bring down ex ante cost, for example, reducing the possibility
of opportunistic behavior or efficient contract breach ex post. Take a situation where
both parties to a contract are well informed about the functioning of a certain financial
product, say a mortgage, and thus ideally the lender would not need to spend time
developing education material to inform the borrower about what happens in case of
default. However, if the borrower has the right to sue ex post if she was not informed
that the lender can seize the property, the lender will be forced to develop training
material to prove that the borrower has been informed. An informed borrower and
lender might be better off if they could shut off the opportunity for the borrower to sue
in case of default. It would eliminate the lender’s need to invest in expensive training
material which is wasteful in this case. But since the borrower cannot abdicate their
right to sue, both parties must bear the cost of the upfront training.
These issues apply in situations where both parties to a contract are sure that they
donotvalueanyex-postprotectionthroughcontractlaws. Thisrequiresthatbothsides
must be well informed about the logic of the contract, all the possible ex post outcomes
and do not fear the possibility of being taken advantage of. In financial markets this is
an important concern since many contracts involve investments in complex and risky
products, say for example trading in derivatives. If customers could sue each time a
bad state of the world realizes and claim that they were misled about the product,
intermediaries would not be able to sell any risky securities. In the US the law has
addressed these issues by granting certain exemptions to high-net-worth individuals
or people who can demonstrate their knowledge in those products. But it does not
provide sweeping exemptions from the ex post protections of contract law, since in
many situations consumers might not even be aware of their own lack of knowledge
relative to an informed market participant.
14
2.2.3. Smart contracts and consumer financial protection
A large literature in finance has shown that many participants in financial con-
tracts, especially retail investors, lack financial literacy and are not well prepared to
understand financial markets, see for example Lusardi and Mitchell (2007). Although
parties are generally free to enter into agreements, subject to certain limitations and
exceptions, the law protects parties in certain situations by determining whether they
had the capacity to enter into a legally binding agreement. For example, contracts
may be voidable if made by a minor or persons who are mentally ill or intoxicated at
the time of contracting. By not allowing mandatory ex post protections through the
legal system, smart contracts do not provide sufficient safeguards for financially less
informed or more fragile customers. Since smart contracts typically have limited means
to test for a person’s financial sophistication or mental capacity, the enforcement of
these contracts could lead to undesirable outcomes, if there is no provision to reverse
the outcome as in traditional contract law.
If financially less sophisticated consumers are aware of their lack of knowledge and
understand that there is a risk that in such an environment they are disadvantaged, the
most plausible result would be to opt out of this contracting environment. However, if
smart contracts became the predominant form of contracting it would severely affect
market participation of less sophisticated consumers. Or alternatively these customers
would have to find trusted intermediaries to act on their behalf. So we are back to
the original problem of how to ensure good performance of intermediaries. But given
the pseudonymity of the blockchain environment it would be more difficult to build
trust. Furthermore, a large literature in behavioral finance has shown that many
financially unsophisticated consumers are not aware of their lack of information or are
overoptimistic about their ability to participate in financial market. As a result they
might unknowingly sign contracts that are against their own interests, see for example
Laibson et al. (2007) or Campbell (2016).
To curtail the most egregious abuses in the traditional system, the US has a set of
consumer financial protection regulations in place such as the Consumer Financial Pro-
tection Act, Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, or Truth in Lending Act. These aim to
reduce the asymmetry in knowledge and information between financial institutions and
customers to provide better outcomes for consumers. The example above suggests that
these types of regulations will be difficult to implement on a permissionless blockchain.
15
2.2.4. Are smart contracts really “trustless”?
An often-highlighted promise of smart contracts is that they may reduce the need
for trust between contracting parties, or trust in the legal system. Legal enforcement
of contracts can be cumbersome and prone to error. In some societies the legal system
itself can even be corrupt and biased. If people do not trust the legal system, they
might prefer a decentralized execution that is not subject to ex post discretion. But
it is not clear whether trust can be removed altogether from the process of smart
contracting or whether it simply requires a shift of trust to other intermediaries and
systems.
In a narrow set of circumstances, smart contract can automatically enforce transac-
tionsifallpartsofthetransactionareon-chain. Forexample, acontractthatexchanges
one token for another on the same blockchain does not rely on enforcement or adju-
dication outside the blockchain. Here the level of trust is as high as the trust in the
blockchain itself. Some level of trust is still required. For example, parties need to
trust the developers that oversee a network’s protocol that they have not embedded
errors in the coding of the platform. Or that the consensus protocol is well enough
designed that it is not prone to any attacks.
However, the vast majority of important financial interactions rely on assets, ac-
tions, or information that exist outside the blockchain. For example, one of the most
importantfinancialcontractsatypicalhouseholdintheUSholds, isamortgageagainst
their house. While one could imagine a smart contract that uses the home as collateral,
the transfer of the house cannot be fully automated on the blockchain ledger. First
the smart contract would have to stipulate how the deed record in the public data
base must change, in case of default or non-repayment of the loan. Second, even if
we assume that the deed record itself lives on the same blockchain, if the person who
currently occupies the house does not move out when the ownership changes, it does
need off chain verification and enforcement to change the de facto state that matters,
e.g. can you occupy the house you supposedly own.
Getting off-chain data presents a number of challenges. The solution revolves
around the use of “oracles” — an off-chain entity that creates a transaction on-chain
with the data posted. Oracles define how a smart contract incorporates off-chain in-
formation into the execution of a program, which we discuss in detail in the next
Section 2.3. The consequence of using oracles is that parties need to trust them.
In addition, given the lack of an ex-post appeals process via the law, a lot is at
stake when specifying a smart contract to be as complete as possible upfront. Espe-
cially for transactions that are more complicated, the machine-readable code for the
smart contract must be complete and follow strict rules of syntax and semantics. In
16
practice, most people are not able to write this type of contract themselves, and there-
fore must rely on coders, or third-party developers. This can lead to perverse incentive
for developers who are more knowledgeable than the principal who hires them to take
advantage of them and exploit deliberate vulnerabilities in the code. The fact that
the code underlying the contract is stored on the blockchain and publicly accessible
alleviates but does not completely eliminate the problem. The pseudonymity of the
blockchain makes it difficult to confirm if a developer of a code is also the agent bene-
fiting from any vulnerability. And at least currently, developers are not bound by the
same fiduciary standards as financial intermediaries.
2.2.5. Observability
Wheninteractingwitharegularserver-basedwebapplication, theuseroftencannot
observe the details of the application’s internal logic. As a result, the user has to trust
the application service provider. Smart contracts mitigate this problem and ensure
that an application runs as expected, since the code underlying the contract is stored
on the blockchain and publicly accessible. However, this type of observability can also
have a downside if it leads to strategic behavior. For example, take any rating system
in finance such as a personal credit score or a firms bond rating. If the smart contract
spells out exactly how the score is calculated, users might optimize against the code so
that they land just above the cut off for the best category. This could undermine the
usefulness of these types of scores, see for example Berg et al. (2020) for an example
of loan officers gaming a scoring threshold.
Another possible problem with the observability of data on the blockchain has
been highlighted in Cong and He (2019). Since generating decentralized consensus
entails distributing information, it changes the information environment for the market
participants. In particular, as Cong and He (2019) argue it can encourage greater
collusion between interested parties.
2.3. Oracles
While the blockchain tries to remove the reliance on third party enforcement, smart
contracts often need to access data from outside the blockchain if they want to interact
with the real world. Consider, for a example, a limit order, where a person writes a
smart contract to automatically sell a token of Bitcoin when the price hits a certain
target level. For this contract to work, the contract needs to access up-to-date Bitcoin
prices. If the data is not obtained in an accurate and timely fashion, a smart trader
could reap large gains by taking advantage of stale or wrong prices.
17
One solution would have been to allow the smart contract to obtain the price by
querying an API of some exchange. The problem with this solution is that almost all
blockchains are designed to be deterministic, which means that any state should be
reproducible given the history of the network transactions. Determinism is important
so that different nodes that execute the contract can come to a consensus. Since
querying the internet can in general produce different values (for example, the price
dependsonthetimeofthequery), allowingthesmartcontracttoquerythepricewould
lead to different values across the nodes, thus making the consensus impossible.
A solution to the above problem is to use an off-chain entity that does the query
and posts the data on-chain. Once the data are on-chain smart contracts can access
and use them. The off-chain entities that query, verify, and authenticate external data
sources and then transmit the information to a blockchain in the crypto parlance are
called oracles.
There are many types of oracles.9 The central issue in design of any oracle is trust.
Similar to a chain, which is as strong as it is weakest link, a smart contract is as secure
as its least secure components. If the data supplied by an oracle are corrupted then so
is the output of the smart contract.
The simplest design of an oracle is where an entity queries a single data provider
and records the data on the blockchain. For example, it could be a query from a
Coinbase web API. This is called a centralized oracle, which is often a fast and efficient
solution. However, reliance on one centralized entity and one centralized data source
introduces several potential points of failure. First, the entity can be corrupted. For
example, the oracle could withhold the data or front run on information it provides.
Second, the data can be corrupted in the process of transferring from the data source
to the blockchain because of a software bug. Finally, the data source itself needs to be
trusted.
In its perpetual quest to minimize trust from relying on third parties, the crypto
community therefore has been actively working on new oracle designs. Inspired by the
decentralized trust model of permissionless blockchain protocols, decentralized oracles
have become one of the fastest growing solutions, with Chainlink currently dominating
the space. The main idea behind any decentralized oracle is (a) to source data from a
large and heterogeneous set of entities (nodes) to determine the validity and accuracy
of the data and (b) by using incentive mechanisms and skin-in-the-game to keep the
entities honest.
Similar to PoS protocols, every participating node that delivers data has to stake
9See, for example, Beniiche (2020) and Caldarelli and Ellul (2021) for a survey of different oracle
types.
18
a deposit, typically in the native token of the network. If the node provides accurate
data, it earns a reward. If it misbehaves, the node can lose a percentage of its stake,
and in some cases, access to future participation in the oracle network and as a result,
all future revenue from the protocol.
The fundamental challenge then is to determine what the truth is. In a blockchain,
the correctness of transactions is a property of internal consistency (no double spend-
ing). There can be multiple conflicting versions of the blockchain (forks), but there
is always one that is correct, and the goal of validators is to agree on which one. In
an oracle network, the situation is more complicated. Depending on the nature of the
data in an oracle network, there might not be the “true” report, but only its noisy
realizations. Therefore, a typical solution to determine the consensus report is to rely
on the wisdom of the crowd and use some form of aggregation across reports, e.g., take
the median or mean value.
This reliance on a diversified set of data providers, however, exposes the process to
the possibility of an adversarial attack, where an adversary bribes the existing nodes
or sets up nodes to produce a corrupt report. Equally problematic, could be collusion
among oracle nodes. If the gains from collusion become very high, the oracle nodes
might not care to lose their current stakes or even all future stakes. As a consequence,
the oracle’s economic rent should be high enough to ensure that its members are to
remain honest.
The research on decentralized oracles is in fledgling state.10 There are many open
questions. For example, holding the size of oracles network fixed what design is the
most resilient to the bribery attack? Is it optimal to restrict the size of the network
or allow a free entry of nodes? Holding economic rent of an oracle fixed, what is the
maximum stake that can be written on the oracle’s output?
3. The current cryptocurrency landscape
According to CoinGecko, there are currently over 10,000 crypto tokens with an ag-
gregate market cap of more than $2 Trillion. Several classifications have been proposed
for crypto tokens.11 We have found useful to parse the universe of crypto tokens into
the following large categories depicted in Figure 2.
[Fig. 2 About Here]
10See the Chainlink white paper https://chain.link/whitepaper and references there in.
11See, for example, Cong and Xiao (2021), Prasad (2021). The recent CAP report describes
how cryptocurrencies fit in the current regulatory landscape, https://www.americanprogress.org/
article/congress-must-not-provide-statutory-carveouts-for-crypto-assets/.
19
3.1. Stablecoins
To start with, we can separate crypto tokens into stablecoins and non-stablecoins.
Stablecoins are designed to maintain a peg to fiat-currencies and therefore, act as a
safe asset that is not subject to the same volatility as many cryptocurrencies. The
absence of central bank digital currency (CBDC) and the growth of DeFi applications
based on smart contracts created a strong demand for private stablecoins that are
native to cryptocurrency protocols. If at the beginning of 2021 the market value of
all stablecoins was $30 billion then by February 2022 it has reached $180 billion. As
a point of comparison, the total amount of British Pound banknotes in circulation is
equal to about £80 billion.12
The existing stablecoins can be divided into stablecoins backed by traditional liquid
and safe assets, for example, US dollars and treasury bills, and algorithmic stablecoins
backed by other cryptocurrencies. Figure 3, the left panel shows the relative share of
stablecoins backed by traditional and crypto assets, with the former being the vast
majority.
[Fig. 3 About Here]
The middle and right panel show the largest stablecoins within each category. The
stablecoins backed by traditional assets are dominated by just three coins Tether, USD
Coin, and Binance USD. To guarantee the peg, the stablecoins backed by traditional
assets should be backed one to one by cash or cashlike assets such as US treasuries.
Many stablecoin providers had made claims that their tokens were 100% backed by
liquid assets, only later to reveal that it was not the case. The famous examples include
the two most popular stablecoins, Tether and USD Coin.13 In both cases, some part
of collateral was held in securities subject to default risk. In October 2021, Tether
was fined $41 million by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission for making
misleading claims about being backed one to one by the US dollar.
Alongwiththestablecoinsbackedbytraditionalassetstherehavealsobeengrowing
acceptance of algorithmic stablecoins. The combined value of algorithmic stablecoins
exceeds $25 billion, with the largest coins being Dai and Terra USD. The rising popu-
larity of algorithmic stablecoins can again be traced to the desire of crypto community
not to rely on centralized parties. Since fiat currencies are issued by governments, the
12See https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/banknote.
13See, for example, https://www.coindesk.com/markets/2021/05/13/tethers-first-
reserve-breakdown-shows-token-49-backed-by-unspecified-commercial-paper/ and
https://www.coindesk.com/business/2021/07/20/circle-reveals-assets-backing-usdc-
stablecoin/.
20
stablecoins backed by traditional assets depend on the trust in government. To break
from the need to trust the government, algorithmic stablecoins, or as they are often
called programmable money, use other cryptocurrencies as a collateral or/and sophis-
ticated algorithms to regulate the stablecoin supply so that to maintain the peg.14
There are now increasing calls for an urgent regulation of the stablecoins. The
main concern is that lack of transparency in reporting of the reserves and inadequate
collateral can make stablecoins to be prone to a run. We get back to these issues in
Section 4.5.
3.2. Non-stablecoins
Non-stablecoins constitute a large and diverse group. Their value depends on the
current investor sentiment and fluctuates widely over time. First, we can isolate coins
that have no other function than being a cryptocurrency, either used for transaction
purposes or as a store value. This group includes the first generation of cryptocur-
rencies such as Bitcoin, Litecoin, etc. By construction, these are the cryptocurrencies
that are built on non-smart contract platforms. The majority of these cryptocurrencies
are based on PoW blockchains. Early on, crypto enthusiasts hoped that these cryp-
tocurrencies could replace government-sponsored currencies as a transaction medium.
However, it quickly became clear that this was infeasible because verifying transactions
on public PoW ledgers is slow and highly energy-inefficient. Since then, a new narra-
tive for the benefits of these coins emerged, with them positioned as the new “gold”
— a digital store of value. Figure A.1 in the Appendix shows that Bitcoin dominates
this group with a market share of more than 90%, followed by Dogecoin. Dogecoin
was created in 2013 by two software engineers Billy Markus and Jackson Palmer as a
parody of a cryptocurrency that was meant to be worthless. It sharply increased in
value and became the first meme coin in 2021 following public support by Elon Musk.
3.2.1. Smart-contract platforms
AnotherlargegrouparetokensissuedbysmartcontractplatformssuchasEthereum,
Binance Smart Chain, Solana, Cardano, etc. In many ways, these tokens are similar to
the tokens in the first group. In particular, they can also be used to pay for transac-
tions on the platform and are a claim on the platform’s economic value. The reason we
separate them from the first group is that cryptocurrencies in the first group offer no
14See, for example, Dai and Terra White Papers for further details: https://assets.website-
files.com/611153e7af981472d8da199c/618b02d13e938ae1f8ad1e45_Terra_White_paper.pdf,
https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper.
21
intrinsic economic value other than the potential for capital appreciation. Therefore,
it is unclear what aggregate risk, other than inflation, they are supposed to be tied to.
In contrast, the value of a smart contract platform depends on the scope and the
numberofapplicationsrunontheplatformsincetheyaffectthenumberoftransactions
and the amount of transaction fees, which in turn, influence the price of the platform
token.15 Figure A.2 and Figure A.3 in the Appendix show the development of smart
contract platforms. The left panel of Figure A.2 shows the evolution of the market
valueofdifferentplatforms. Therightpanelshowsplatforms’marketshare. FigureA.3
shows the growth of the total value locked (TVL) on the platforms. TVL is the overall
value of crypto assets deposited in applications run on the platform. It has emerged
as a main metric for gauging interest in a particular platform or sector of the crypto
industry.
Figure A.2 and Figure A.3 show that smart-contract platforms grew exceptionally
fast in 2021. If at the start of 2021, the total market value of smart-contract platforms
was around $144 billion, at the end of January 2022 it stood at $683 billion, almost
reaching$1trillioninNovember2021. Similarly,thecombinedTVLacrossallplatforms
was 18 billion in the beginning of 2021 and grew to about 177 billion by February 2022.
Figure A.2 and Figure A.3 also show that Ethereum still dominates this space. The
market share of Ethereum has been relatively stable at about 50%. The high fees on
Ethereum platform, however, have led to the growth of other smart platforms and to
an increase in share of applications deployed on them. If in the beginning of 2021,
Ethereum completely dominated the space, by the end of 2021, its share declined to
66%.
3.2.2. DeFi applications
Smart contracts layered on a permissionless blockchain protocol have given rise to
the emergence of what is called decentralized finance (DeFi) — a suite of financial
applications meant to replicate many of the elements of traditional financial system
without relying on centralized intermediaries.
Figure 4 shows the five largest DeFi sectors. The main applications so far have
been centered on trading platforms, borrowing and lending marketplaces, oracles, yield
farming, and insurance. The left panel shows the evolution of the market value of the
sectors; the right panel — the total value locked in each sector.
15ThisdivisioninthetwogroupsisasimplificationsinceeventheBitcoinblockchaincanhostother
protocols, e.g., Omni layer, or help secure other platforms, e.g., Rootstock, DeFiChain. However,
presently the scope of these applications compared to those built on smart contract platforms is
limited.
22
[Fig. 4 About Here]
Decentralized crypto exchanges. Decentralized exchanges (DEXs) have attracted
a lot of attention and have become the fastest growing sector of the DeFi universe.
One of the main advantages of decentralized exchanges over centralized exchanges is
the ability for users to keep control of their private keys. When market participants
deposit their crypto tokens with a centralized exchange they forfeit their ownership to
the exchange. This makes them exposed to exchange risk — if the exchange is hacked
and its funds are stolen investors can experience significant losses. More generally,
trading on a centralized exchange requires participants to trust in the exchange that
goes against the maxim of decentralized finance. Trading on DEXs is governed by
smart contracts and eliminates counterparty risk for the investors. The settlement of
transactions is instantaneous, after they are confirmed and included on the blockchain.
The majority of DEXs use an automated market maker (AMM) protocols, which
allow a direct exchange of two crypto tokens, say X and Y. The main object in an
AMM protocol is a new market structure called liquidity pool. A liquidity pool consists
of two pools: one of X tokens and one of Y tokens. The ratio of tokens in each pool
defines the current exchange rate between the two tokens.
A liquidity pool supports two main operations: liquidity provision and a swap
between the two tokens. Anyone who owns the two tokens can choose to be a liquidity
provider by depositing tokens X and Y to the respective pools in the proportion equal
to the current ratio. In return, the liquidity provider receives a claim on the share of
the two pools’ tokens (the so-called LP tokens).
A swap order allows one to exchange one token for the other. The exchange rate
depends on a particular implementation of the AMM protocol and is determined by
some deterministic rule called the bonding curve. For example, in the constant product
AMM used by a popular DEX Uniswap 2 if the initial amounts of X and Y tokens in
the liquidity pool are x and y, and someone wants to exchange ∆x of X tokens for Y
tokens the exchange rate is determined according to the following rule:
∆y y
(x+∆x)·(y +∆y) = x·y ⇔ = − . (1)
∆x x+∆x
Swapping X for Y increases the relative share of X tokens in the liquidity pool and
therefore, lowers its price relative to the price of Y tokens. Whenever the equilibrium
price of the two tokens deviates from the current ratio in the two pools, one can profit
from it by executing a swap order until the ratio reaches the equilibrium price. To
compensate liquidity providers for providing liquidity everyone who executes a swap
order pays a transaction fee that goes to the liquidity pool. This is similar to limit-
23
order book exchanges, where liquidity takers executing a market order usually pay to
liquidity providers who supply limit orders.16
The DEX’s smart contract usually allows to trade any pair of tokens supported
by the underlying blockchain. For example, Uniswap 2, realized on the Ethereum
blockchain, allows to trade any pair of ERC 20 tokens. If no liquidity pool exists for a
particularpairoftokens, itcanbefreelycreated. Theviabilityofthepoolthendepends
on the ability of the pool to attract liquidity providers and traders. The liquidity is
usually concentrated in a few pairs. Figure A.4 in the Appendix shows how DEX
trading volume compares against CEX. While the volume of DEX has experienced fast
growth, it still constitutes only a fraction of the CEX volume.
Similar to centralized exchanges, a few DEX dominate the space. Figure A.5 in the
Appendix, left panel shows the market share of the top 10 centralized exchanges, the
right panel shows the top 10 decentralized exchanges. The majority of CEX volume is
concentrated on offshore exchanges such as Binance, Huobi, OkEx, and FTX, which
are subject to little or no regulatory oversight. Similarly, Uniswap, PancakeSwap and
SushiSwap account for about 70% volume among decentralized exchanges.
Borrowing and lending. Lending protocols have been another fast growing sector
of the DeFi. Similar to DEXs, lending and borrowing are governed by smart contracts.
The vast majority of DeFi lending is over-collateralized loans secured by other crypto
coins, which is primarily used for creating leveraged trading positions.
AtypicaltransactioninvolvesborrowingsomeofthestablecoinsandputtingEthereum
or Bitcoin as a collateral. Since the value of Ethereum or Bitcoin fluctuates there is a
danger that the value of collateral can be lower than the borrowed amount. To mit-
igate this risk a smart contract uses an Oracle to obtain up-to-date cryptocurrency
prices and automatically liquidate the position if the loan-to-value falls below a speci-
fied threshold. The threshold depends on the perceived riskiness of the collateral token
and ranges between 50% and 80%.
A borrower has to pay a borrowing interest rate and can receive a lending rate
on their collateral. In addition, a protocol collects a fee for its service, which goes to
the pool controlled by protocol token holders. The lending rate is a function of the
borrowing rate and the utilization of funds: borrowing fees, net of protocol fees, are
spread among all lenders. The borrowing rate depends on the asset. It is set by the
smart contract to maximize utilization of funds and changes in response to the market
conditions.
Figure 5 shows that similar to DEX, the lending space is dominated by a few large
16SeeAoyagi(2020), AoyagiandIto(2021), LeharandParlour(2021), andCapponiandJia(2021)
for further results and comparison of decentralized and centralized exchanges.
24
players such as Aave, Anchor, and Compound protocols. Most protocols operate on a
few chains. For example, Aave is built on three smart-contract platforms: Ethereum,
Avalanche, and Polygon; Anchor only uses Terra, and Compound only Ethereum.
Thus, the concentration within a particular smart contract platform is even higher.
[Fig. 5 About Here]
Figure A.6 in the Appendix shows the aggregated amount deposited and bor-
rowed across different crypto tokens. The main activity is concentrated in stablecoins
along with Ethereum and Wrapped Bitcoin (WBTC).17 A large imbalance between the
amount deposited and borrowed for Ethereum and Bitcoin means that investors use
them as a collateral to borrow stablecoins, which can be used, for example, to buy
Ethereum and Bitcoin, thus creating a leveraged position.
Yield farming. The desire to earn supersized returns led to the proliferation of smart
contracts that aim to maximize the yield from holding crypto tokens. As we showed
above crypto investors have several strategies to earn return on their coins. First,
they can delegate their coins to validators who stake the coins and earn rewards for
verification of transactions. Second, investors can earn fees for providing liquidity to
DEXs. Third, theycanearnaninterestbydepositingtheircoinsintolendingprotocols.
Finally, some token providers use airdrops — the practice of giving away tokens to a
subset of investors meeting particular criteria.
The return on any of the above strategies varies over time. Yield farming smart
contracts (or simply yield farms) aim to optimize the return by optimally allocating
investments among multiple protocols and DeFi applications. The process also usually
involves high leverage. For example, LP tokens obtained after placing tokens in a
liquidity pool can be further used as a collateral or deposited into lending protocols.
The high leverage creates a risk of large losses due to a chain reaction of multiple
contracts being liquidated when some contracts lose their value either during downturn
market movements or because of some hacks. Also, while yield farm strategies are
designed to maximize the yield on investment it does not automatically mean high
returns because the underlying crypto tokens can loose value. In many cases, high
yields are financed through in an increase in the token supply where the net effect
depends on the investors willingness to absorb an ever increasing supply of tokens.
17Wrapped Bitcoin is an Ethereum token that is intended to represent Bitcoin on the Ethereum
blockchain. It is backed on a 1:1 basis with Bitcoin.
25
3.2.3. NFT
Lastly, 2021 have seen a meteoric rise in hype and value of non-fungible tokens
(NFTs). NFT is a unique piece of data stored on a blockchain. The data can be
associated with a particular digital or physical asset or a license to use the asset for a
specified purpose. Because each token is uniquely identifiable, NFTs differ from other
cryptocurrencies. NFTs can be bought and sold, and are seen as a form of digital art.
The space attracted attention in March 2021 when a digital collage of 5,000 images
by the artist known as Beeple was sold at an eye-popping price of $69 million at the
Christie’s auction house. The combined value of all NFTs in the end of January 2022
stood at about $13 billion.18
4. DeFi vs. traditional financial system
Many of the existing problems with intermediaries originate from well-known eco-
nomic frictions that are inherent in financial markets, such as asymmetric informa-
tion, adverse selection, moral hazard, etc. This creates opportunities for abuse and
also significant costs of guarding the public and the economy against financial fraud,
malfeasance and systemic risk. Technological innovations have a long history in finance
in helping to provide solutions to the above problems and improving the efficiency of
financial markets.
DeFi applications thus far have had limited scope; they have been mainly built
aroundsimpleapplicationssuchastradingincryptocurrenciesorcollateralizedlending.
But they are growing rapidly in scope and complexity. They also escaped the burden of
regulation and consumer protections and benefited from tremendous investor optimism
that allowed many problems and inefficiencies to go unnoticed.
In what follows, we aim to highlight the important trade-offs offered by the two
architectures. When comparing the potential benefits of DeFi solutions with those
offered by the traditional system, it is important to think about the proposed new so-
lutions in the context of the larger financial architecture rather than narrowly focusing
on individual dimensions of possible inefficiencies.
4.1. Data privacy and transparency
How to protect data privacy in an increasingly digital society has become a major
concern to regulators, activists and regular citizens alike. Crypto enthusiasts often
tout the anonymity of transactions “a feature, not a bug” and view it as a major
18https://nftgo.io/overview.
26
benefit over the traditional model, where the failure or corruption of a centralized
intermediary could lead client data to be mistakenly exposed or hacked. While it is
in the commercial interest of intermediaries to protect the privacy of their clients, it
is a reasonable concern that intermediaries might not endogenize the full cost to the
clients.19 This conflict leads to a classic underinvestment problem relative to what
consumers would prefer. In addition, financial intermediaries might have an interest in
using client data for their own commercial purposes, or allowing third parties access,
including the government.
Recognizing this problem, in the US a large set of regulations, such as the Bank
SecrecyAct,RighttoFinancialPrivacyAct,theGramm-Leach-BlileyAct,andtheFair
Credit Reporting Act, are put in place to protect consumers from unlawful access to
their financial accounts by private and public institutions, and the unlawful disclosure
or commercial use of financial information.
But the laws also recognize an important trade-off between individual privacy and
other important societal goals such as preventing malevolent actors from using the
financial system for money laundering, financing of criminal and terrorist activities,
or tax evasion. This is typically achieved by putting into place Know-Your-Customer
(KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) laws that require financial institutions to
verify the identity of a client when opening an account and to provide government
authorities with information about suspicious financial transactions. Financial inter-
mediaries in the traditional system then play the dual role of acting on the one hand as
a “shield” to prevent the unauthorized collection, use, and disclosure of sensitive data.
But on the other hand, they selectively grant access to information in well-defined cir-
cumstances where access to such data is important for the functioning of the economy
or the broader society. Examples include reporting of capital gain tax to the IRS, or
granting access to financial accounts of individuals in cases where an illegal or terrorist
intent has been clearly defined by law and regulation.
Cryptocurrencies built on permissionless protocols preserve privacy by design by
not collecting any personal information about account holders. Crypto tokens are rep-
resented by alphanumeric strings and protected by cryptography algorithms. Crypto
addresses are very easy to generate and many protocols encourage users not to use
an address more than once. Even if a protocol has a complete record of transac-
tions, the identity of the person behind the transactions cannot be established unless
this person uses the tokens to transact with an entity that does enforce KYC norms,
such as regulated financial institutions. In many ways, the current modus operandi
19Some infamous recent examples of data breaches in the financial are the 2017 breach of Equifax
thatexposedpersonalinformationof147millionpeopleorbankslikeCapitalOneandFirstAmerican
Financial Corporation, see https://www.upguard.com/blog/biggest-data-breaches.
27
of cryptocurrencies is similar to an old Swiss model of banking where people could
set up anonymous accounts and no questions were asked. This model, however, has
been rejected in the majority of developed countries in favor of more transparency and
accountability.
Collecting and protecting data is not costless, and in the traditional architecture,
intermediariesbearthiscost. Thebenefitsofrelyingonintermediariesastheimportant
“entry nodes” for participants in the traditional financial system, means that KYC
norms or anti-money laundering laws have to be monitored only at a limited set of
nodes. For example, when a customer makes a payment using a credit card or a bank
transfer from a US bank, a retailer does not need to worry about the legality of the
funds. Similarly, the ability to collect taxes depends on the government’s capacity to
trace transactions and link them back to a person or organization. In the traditional
system, centralized intermediaries such as exchanges or brokers are responsible for
reporting transactions to the IRS.
The permissionless and pseudonymous architecture of DeFi generates formidable
challenges for tax enforcement, aggravates issues of money laundering and other kinds
offinancialmalfeasance, andasaresultcreatesexternalitiesontherestoftheeconomy.
If entry into the system is not monitored by intermediaries but happens completely
anonymously by setting up an address on a blockchain, KYC norms and AML laws
would need to be regulated at the transactional level. In many cases this could be
prohibitivelycostly, orimpractical, andthereforeleadtoanin-transparentenvironment
that facilitates illegal transactions.
Consider, for example, trading on a decentralized exchange. Recall that a decen-
tralized exchange is simply a smart contract that executes trading between any pair
of cryptocurrencies and that can be deployed anonymously by anyone. Suppose a cus-
tomer trades and realizes some capital gains. Since the identity of the person behind
the transactions cannot be established until this person uses the tokens at an entity
that does an ID check, by transacting with entities that do not verify any ID, the
person could spend the tokens linked to the capital gains transactions, and thus avoid
ever paying capital gains taxes.
But even if the person transacts with an entity that does enforce KYC standards,
it does not reveal the capital gains tax that is associated with the past transactions of
this coin. In order to impute the true capital gains tax, the entity would need to either
investigate the full history of transactions up to the current point or would need to
delegate this task to another intermediary. In practice, tracing transactions along often
multipleprotocolsisachallengingproblem. Specializedblockchainanalyticscompanies
such as Bitfury Crystal and Chainalysis have shown that it can be successfully done
28
in select cases of illegal transactions. However, successfully tracing all transactions
will likely be very costly. Makarov and Schoar (2021) show for example, that Bitcoin
flowingoutofdarknetmarketslikeHydracanbelaunderedthroughmanyintermediary
addresses and can eventually enter KYC compliant exchanges such as Coinbase or
Gemini without being tagged.
The pseudonymous nature of cryptocurrencies also makes it much harder to enforce
rules against market manipulation, insider trading, and self-dealing, since suspicious
transactions cannot easily be traced back to individuals. For example, large holders of
cryptocurrencies have strong incentives to lobby government officials or regulators to
promote investments in cryptocurrencies and adopt lax regulation. Especially at the
early stages in the development of new technologies, any announcements endorsing the
official use of cryptocurrencies create significant positive price impact, see Auer and
Claessens (2020). The danger is that some regulators or politicians (or their friends)
receive gifts in the form of cryptocurrencies (or simply already own cryptocurrencies)
which would tilt their decision towards adoption even if it is not in the interest of the
general public.
As the above discussion shows, to safeguard society against these inherent risks,
a completely new framework of ensuring KYC and AML standards would have to
be developed. The majority of DeFi players actively lobby that they should not be
bearing the costs of linking transactions to economic actors and ensuring that the
financial system preserves an adequate level of transparency and accountability citing
technological constraints or the danger of losing a competitive advantage in the crypto
space.20 ButunlesssocietygivesupentirelyoncollectingtaxesandimplementingKYC
and AML practices, somebody has to bear these costs.
4.2. Economic rents
Another important dimension by which to assess a financial system is how economic
rents are distributed among agents in the system. An important concern with the
traditional financial system has been that the centralized position of intermediaries
can allow them to extract excess economic rents at the expense of their customers.
The proponents of the DeFi architecture typically argue that the open-source and
permissionless nature of DeFi protocols promotes competition. Therefore, the claim is
that DeFi solutions should drive out excess rents.
This view, however, neglects the fact that free entry is not synonymous with more
20See, for example, https://stakingfac.medium.com/staking-infrastructure-providers-
unite-in-the-european-blockchain-association-6ecebbb8139f, https://republicans-
financialservices.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=408238.
29
competition and thus not a panacea for beneficial outcomes in many situations. The
effectiveness of competition depends on a number of factors such as whether there are
barriers to entry, switching costs, product differentiation, asymmetric information, and
network externalities. The presence of any of these factors hinders competition, and in
some cases, even creates adverse effects from competition. Technological changes that
affect any of these factors, therefore, also transform the competitive landscape.
Similar to the traditional financial system, there are several natural points where
rents can accumulate at different layers in the DeFi architecture due to endogenous
constraints to competition.
First, at the level of validators of transactions, in both PoW and PoS rents can
accumulate due to inherent economies of scale and scope. In theory, in PoW protocols
if miners were fully decentralized one could expect them to earn zero rent in steady-
state because of free entry. In practice, however, as we showed in Section 1.1, mining
is concentrated in pools and at the level of individual miners. High concentration
of mining power can facilitate collusion and help sustain transaction fees above their
average costs. For a dominant protocol such as Bitcoin, the competition from other
PoW protocols can be limited because of the negative externalities the dominant net-
work has on the security of smaller PoW networks. In particular, mining capacity can
be redirected to launch 51% attacks on the smaller networks, as discussed in section
Section 1.1.
Similarly, rents can also accrue to validators in PoS protocols. We showed in Sec-
tion 1.2 that validators in PoS are concentrated. Furthermore, the same validators are
active across a large cross-section of cryptocurrencies, effectively forming a new mar-
ket structure. These validators control a large proportion of wealth that gives them
substantial competitive advantage over newcomers with small amount of wealth.
Second, rents can also accrue at the level of the smart contract platforms that are
builtonthebaselayers. SimilartotraditionalpaymentsystemslikeVisa,Mastercardor
Paypal there are strong network externalities. Smart contract platforms differentiate
themselves by the choice of programming language to code up smart contracts and
the network architecture, and often have limited degree of interoperability. While
smart contracts built on the same protocol can interact seamlessly with each other,
communicationbetweenapplicationsbuilton different platforms ingeneralis limited.21
Naturally, the decision on which platform to build an application on depends on
the existing pool of applications already deployed on the platform and the platform’s
future growth prospects. A popular platform with a wide range of applications and
21A number of solutions have been proposed and are being developed to increase interoperability
between chains, see for example, https://ethereum.org/en/bridges/ for more details.
30
a large user base provide better business prospects, and therefore, is more attractive
than a less popular platform. Often these network effects increase exponentially with
each user. As a result, developers and users might choose a more popular platform
even if it charges higher transaction fees. These network externalities might also stand
in the way of switching to a platform with a better technology if a critical mass of users
is captured by the incumbent platform.
One could argue that even if the platform is a monopolist, competition between
validators on that platform will keep fees low. However, as we showed above high
concentration of validators can lead to collusion and allow them to earn excess rents.
Even if validators do not collude, high transaction fees can still be realized if the
platform operating capacity is limited and users need to pay a premium for priority
execution, Huberman et al. (2021). Finally, the majority of PoS protocols have a
minimum level of transaction fees as a protocol parameter, which provides the platform
with a direct tool to limit competition among validators and earn rent.
Figure A.7 in the Appendix shows total transaction fees in the year 2021 across
different platforms. The case of Ethereum is striking. The platform generated $10
billion in fees from about 460 million transaction. In contrast, Visa’s total revenue
was $24 billion over 165 billion transactions.22 Thus, an average Ethereum fee per
transaction has been 100X that of Visa.
For PoS platforms, an added complexity arises from the fact that the going concern
value of the platform also affects the security of the platform itself and the applications
that run on it. Since the value of the platform depends on the level of transaction fees,
fees should be high enough to deter possible attacks on the platform, which can further
support the platform’s rent in equilibrium. These security concerns can also decrease
competition among platforms. Since a low-value platform can be more easily attacked,
the concerns over the platform’s security may lead to slower growth, which in turn,
can reduce the platform’s current value.
Third, economies of scale at the level of individual DeFi applications can allow
them to assemble local monopoly power and extract rents despite the open-source
architecture of the blockchain. In addition, while in theory crypto smart contracts are
usually described as an open-source code, in practice successful applications have tried
to protect its code and limit its distribution. Here, an example of two decentralized
exchanges, Uniswap and SushiSwap, is instructive.
Originally, Uniswap V2 was operated as an open-source software utilizing a General
Public License (GPL), which allows anyone to run, distribute, and/or modify its code.
22This figure is larger than transaction fees alone since Visa earns revenue from sources other than
fees paid by direct users.
31
This has been used by a pseudonymous developer called Chef Nomi to create a clone of
Uniswap called SushiSwap. Similar to centralized exchanges, decentralized exchanges
are subject to economies of scale. An exchange with a large liquidity pool is preferred
over an exchange with a small one. Therefore, an exchange clone will typically find it
difficult to challenge the original exchange.
To compete with Uniswap, SushiSwap introduced a new business model, which is
now adopted by a majority of other applications. The main change made by Chef
Nomi was to create a governance token (SUSHI) and give it as a reward to traders
who provide liquidity to the platform. The token allows its holders to vote on how the
SushiSwap platform is run and potentially receive a portion of the transaction fees. As
a consequence, investors can trade these tokens and speculate on the future prospects
of the platform. This business model strengthens network externalities, and therefore,
limits copycat strategies and competition. The more valuable the platform and its
tokens are, the higher is the reward for liquidity providers. A larger liquidity pool, in
turn, attracts more trading on the platform, which makes the platform more valuable.
The SUSHI token was also used to launch a “vampire attack” to drain liquidity
out of Uniswap, whereby SUSHI tokens could be exchanged for Uniswap liquidity pool
(LP) tokens. Those LP tokens would then be exchanged for the original assets put into
the Uniswap liquidity pools, thus creating liquidity for SushiSwap instead. The attack
was successful, draining Uniswap of about 55% of its liquidity.23
In response, Uniswap introduced its own governance token (UNI). To limit copycat
attacks, the new version of the protocol, Uniswap V3, also adopted a different license
agreement called Business Source License (BSL), which incorporates copyright law and
allows Uniswap governance to restrict unauthorized commercialization of an entity’s
source code for two years.
Finally, rent extraction can even be driven by frictions at the customer level due to
lack of financial literacy or behavioral biases. Many financial products today including
smart contracts are complex contracts with multiple features. If consumers lack the
financial sophistication to understand these product features, institutions that issue
these contracts can shroud the actual cost of a product or service. A typical shrouding
technique is to advertise or draw attention to one set of attractive features but hide
other more expensive ones. If consumer are unable to analyze what is the best product
even competition might not prevent rent extraction. In fact, more competition might
lead to more shrouding as competing firms try to appeal to consumers with evermore
enticing and salient features while hiding the unappealing dimensions of the product.
23https://www.vklaw.com/ImagineThatIPLawBlog/uniswap-v3-employs-a-new-license-
agreement.
32
Consumer finance products are often designed and marketed in this fashion, which
leads to differential targeting of customers based on their financial literacy, see for
example C´el´erier and Vall´ee (2017) or Ru and Schoar (2016). Similarly, in the crypto
space, practices such as airdrops, yield farming, and meme DeFi tokens have helped
capture interest of many investors, but many industry insiders question their value.24
4.3. Transaction costs
Even if a financial system limits economic rents it can still be inefficient because
of high transaction costs. The traditional financial system has many inefficiencies,
which result in high cost of banking services and long settlement time of transactions.
A substantial part of these costs comes from need to cover brick-and-mortar costs of
traditional banks and outdated infrastructure. Many banks today still use customized
softwarethat goes back to 1980s that lack real-time accountreconciliation and liquidity
management capabilities.
While many technological advances are largely exogenous to banks’ actions the
decision to when and how to implement them depends on the financial architecture.
Centralized intermediaries can have limited incentives to invest in new technologies
that could threaten their centralized position even if they are welfare improving. Also,
modernizing bank’s internal system can have a limited effect if other banks do not co-
ordinate on the change. Often the threat of losing business to new entrants is necessary
to force the incumbents to adopt more efficient technology.
The development of blockchain technology has had certainly positive effect on the
incentives of financial industry to upgrade its infrastructure and reduce costs. It is
less clear, however, to what extent the potential to reduce the costs depends on the
permissionless nature of blockchain. In many cases, arguments can be made that
a permissioned blockchain could designed to deliver a more cost-efficient and robust
solution without curtailing competition.25
Notice also that the permissionless and open-source nature of a protocol does not
necessary make an innovation process easy. It is often argued that if a blockchain
protocol is inefficient then one can create an improved version (aka hard fork) by
copying and upgrading the existing code. We showed in Section 4.2 that competition
can be limited between different protocols because of strong network externalities and
miners/validators can earn rent in equilibrium. If a new fork leaves less rent to min-
24https://decrypt.co/40939/defi-meme-coins-no-joke-billions-ethereum,
https://decrypt.co/40318/vitalik-buterin-ethereum-defi-yield-farmers-central-banks.
25See e.g., https://www.swift.com/news-events/news/swift-completes-landmark-dlt-
proof-concept.
33
ers/validators they can have limited incentives to support it. Bier (2021) details the
fight among Bitcoin developers about the Bitcoin protocol parameters that occurred
in 2015-2017 and provides additional insights into challenges that come with forking a
competing blockchain.
4.4. Governance
The promoters of cryptocurrencies often highlight the idea that the blockchain
ledger removes the need for a trusted third party in the execution of contracts. How-
ever, this does not mean that the system can function completely devoid of any hu-
man intervention. Even if the execution of transactions and smart contracts on the
blockchain are automated, the rules governing the blockchain itself and any upgrades
to the system must be agreed upon and implemented by its participants. These rules
define the governance of the system and in turn how it represents the interest of its
different stake holders.
The major stakeholders in a blockchain eco-system are first the core developers
who are charged with writing and updating the code that runs the blockchain. The
validators who verify transactions and ensure the integrity of the blockchain are the
second set of stake holders. Often, they decide if they want to adopt the changes
provided by the developers. The third important group are the token holders. We can
think of these as investors or equity holders. Finally, the forth group are users of the
platform. On some platforms, the third and the fourth groups are the same people.
While all stakeholders have an interest of making the cryptocurrency they are en-
gaged with succeed and grow, their incentives are not always completely aligned. For
example, the users and developers might want fees on the blockchain to be low to make
utilization more attractive, while investors and validators want to maximize the return
on their financial investments. Stakeholders might also differ in their non-pecuniary
benefits, e.g. some participants might be willing to forgo economic benefits for other
objectives such as maintaining the independence or purity of the blockchain or possibly
to undermine other blockchains as discussed before.
Thus, the classic problems in governance apply also to the crypto universe: Rules
havetobesettofacilitatecoordinationandprovideincentivestoadoptvalueincreasing
investments; and to prevent minority stakeholders from being expropriated by powerful
insiders. Providers of capital are particularly prone to expropriation, since once the
investment is made they do not have continued value added or recourse to the firm.
Corporate governance has been a prominent issue probably as long as organizations
exist; in academic research the topic has attracted an enormous body of research
34
at least since the publication of Berle and Means’ famous book in 1932.26 While
there is significant heterogeneity across countries in the specific corporate governance
rules, academic research has shown that private solutions even in competitive financial
marketscannotgenerallyresolvegovernanceissues, andtherecoursetothelegalsystem
isacrucialprerequisiteforawellfunctioningfinancialsystem, seeforexampleLaPorta
et al. (2000).
But this reliance on legal enforcement clashes with the maxim of decentralized
finance that tries to avoid placing trust in any actor or institution, including the legal
ones. In response to this challenge, decentralized finance has tried to develop a new
form of governance, so-called decentralized autonomous organization (DAO). The basic
idea of DAO is to spread control over decisions among all interested stakeholders. This
is done by issuing special “governance” tokens that give their holders the power to
propose changes to the protocol and vote on them. All activity is governed by smart
contracts and recorded on the blockchain. In most DeFi applications one governance
token equals a vote and new proposals are implemented according to a predefined
majority rule. To ensure that the holders of governance tokens have an interest in the
success of the platform long term, protocols often channel a share of the network’s
transaction fees into the wallets of the governance token holders. The tokens may also
carry non-governance rights, like the right to be exchanged for certain other tokens
at predefined rates. A famous example of DAO is MakerDAO.27 Here is how DAO is
explained on the Ethereum website:28
“Starting an organization with someone that involves funding and money requires
a lot of trust in the people you are working with. But it is hard to trust someone
you have only ever interacted with on the Internet. With DAOs you do not need to
trust anyone else in the group, just the DAO’s code, which is 100% transparent and
verifiable by anyone.”
But while a transparent and verifiable governance process is certainly an important
first step, it does not necessarily ensure good governance. Any DAO design faces the
same fundamental trade-offs and issues as traditional organizations. First, decision
making in a fully decentralized organization can be inefficient. When the ownership is
dispersed and stakes are small no owner might find it in their interest to spend effort
andinvestinlearningaboutallthecomplexitiesneededtomakeadecision. Asaresult,
manystakeholdersmightrefrainfromvotingorlendtheirvotestoapartythatistrying
to amass voting rights for self-interested reasons. Second, there is always a danger that
investors with large stakes (blockholders) can capture the control and impose their
26For an overview see Hermalin and Weisbach (2017).
27https://makerdao.com/en/governance.
28https://ethereum.org/en/dao/.
35
preference on the system. Recognizing this problem, corporate laws usually impose
strict disclosure rules on blockholders. Emulating similar rules on a public permission-
less blockchain would be challenging since everyone can control multiple anonymous
accounts. Third, the voting system can give more power to participants, who may only
be interested in maximizing short term profits as opposed to developing the protocol
towards innovative use cases.29 These arguments are very similar to the debate about
investor short-termism in traditional governance, see Roe (2020).
Not surprisingly, the crypto space is abundant with colorful examples of governance
issues.30 Ultimately, the majority of insiders recognizes the inherent tensions posed by
greater decentralization. Figure 6 shows that in the majority of crypto projects, devel-
opers and early investors chose to keep control of the platform by allocating significant
stakes to themselves. In addition, even if developers do not have a large stake, in many
cases they managed to maintain de facto significant control over the platform, e.g.,
Vitalik Buterin who has been dubbed the “benevolent dictator for life.”31
[Fig. 6 About Here]
There has been little evidence so far to suggest that the crypto space can success-
fully resolve governance issues without relying on some off-chain mechanisms. Given
that governance issues of blockchain platforms and traditional financial firms are not
materially different, it is very likely that robust governance mechanisms will require
the support of external regulation.
The history of corporate governance demonstrates that simply providing incentives
for managers or investors, might not be sufficient to deter bad actors if the financial
gains from misbehavior are large. As the implementation of governance rules in the US
has shown, the ability for personal accountability of managers and directors is centrally
important, see Bartlett and Talley (2017). Fiduciary duties that hold corporate agents
personally accountable play a critical role in the enforcement of governance rules. The
idea is that the threat of punishment creates disincentives from fraudulent behavior,
where just losing some money from fraud would not have the same effect.
The pseudonymous nature of the permissionless blockchain environment, however,
can make it difficult to hold bad actors accountable for their actions in the same way.
29In fact, many recent attacks on DeFi apps exploited the possibility of taking over the voting
mechanismtodivertfundstotheattacker,seeforexamplehttps://www.wsj.com/articles/crypto-
thieves-get-bolder-by-the-heist-stealing-record-amounts-11650582598.
30See,forexample,Bier(2021)andanattemptedhostiletakeoverofSteem: https://decrypt.co/
38050/steem-steemit-tron-justin-sun-cryptocurrency-war.
31https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benevolent_dictator_for_life. Vitalik Buterin has also
been one of the prominent critics of the DAO. See, for example, https://vitalik.ca/general/
2021/08/16/voting3.html.
36
4.5. Systemic risk
One of the main sources of systemic risk in the traditional financial system is the
reliance on fractional reserve banking. When banks take deposits from the public they
only need to hold a fraction of these deposits in liquid assets as a reserve and can lend
the remainder out to borrowers. The goal of a fractional reserve system is to expand
economic activities in the economy by freeing capital for lending. It permits banks to
use the majority of the deposits to generate returns in the form of interest rates on
loans. The efficiency, however, comes at a cost of possible bank failures and runs.
DeFi so far has been operating under a narrow banking model, where every loan is
overcollateralized.32 Narrow banking removes many of the problems faced by fractional
reserve systems, but it also constrains the efficient use of capital. The main risk
comes from the ability of investors to take leveraged positions and a potential run on
stablecoins.
A run on stablecoins can occur for a number of reasons. For stablecoins backed
by traditional assets a run can happen for similar reasons to a run on bank or money
market funds. In the absence of timely information about reserves, if investors doubt
the quality of the collateral, they have an incentive to exchange the stablecoin for cash,
causing a run unless the stablecoin is backed one-for-one with liquid assets like cash
or short-term Treasuries. Possible solutions range from issuing stablecoins through
insured banks, requiring stablecoins to be backed one-for-one with safe assets, to es-
tablishing a central bank digital currency. For a detailed discussion of the regulation
of stablecoins and the trade-offs between private and central bank digital currencies,
see Gorton and Zhang (2021) and Gorton (2021).
The situation is more complex in the case of algorithmic stablecoins that rely on
intricate designs meant to help maintain the peg. Here the issue is less about trans-
parency or misreporting because the design of a stablecoin is public knowledge and
all transactions are recorded on the blockchain. Rather the main concern is about the
complexity and potential fragility of the system. Since algorithmic stablecoins are not
fully backed by safe assets, it is reasonable to expect that irrespective of a particular
design, there always exist states of the world where the peg is broken and there can be
a run on the stablecoin. The available documentation of stablecoins universally lacks
rigorous analysis and contains only claims that the design is robust, which as the case
of Iron Finance’s Titanium proves can just be wishful thinking.33
32There have been isolated examples of undercollateralized loans. See https://medium.com/
coinmonks/the-current-state-of-undercollateralized-defi-lending-2021-1f84e14527b5
for an overview of the current solutions.
33https://forkast.news/iron-finances-defi-bank-run-why-mark-cuban-got-rekted/.
37
The ability to establish highly leveraged positions is another source of systemic
risk. The crypto eco-system is famous for its wide range of highly leveraged products,
with many exchanges offering up to 100X leverage for perpetual derivative contracts.34
Figure A.8 in the Appendix shows that starting from July 2021 volume in crypto
derivatives dominated the volume in spot markets. High leverage exacerbates volatility
and as many industry observers believe is responsible for strong de-leveraging cycles
and associated sharp drops in the cryptocurrency prices.35
DeFiaddsanadditionalcomplicationtothepicture. ManyDeFiprotocolsfacilitate
leverage and accept other protocols’ tokens as collateral. Even though every smart
contractandtransactionarerecordedonablockchain,andtherefore,intheory,couldbe
analyzed, inpracticemultipleinterconnectingcontractsinteractingwithpseudonymous
accounts result in a highly complex, and potentially fragile system. This fragility could
potentially be acerbated if some critical smart contracts have unintended coding bugs.
5. Regulation
As discussed several times before in this article, the new financial architecture
proposed by cryptocurrencies and decentralized finance, presents formidable challenges
for regulators. Regulations of financial assets and services typically have three broad
goals: (1) prevent the use of funds for illicit activities, money laundering or tax evasion;
(2) protect participants in financial markets against fraud and abuses; (3) and ensure
the integrity of markets and payment systems and overall financial stability.
Our discussion in Section 4 highlights that at present DeFi solutions do not comply
with the above three goals. If society does not want to give up on ensuring these
goals, some form of technological and regulatory solution seems desirable. In the
responsetotheriseofcryptocurrencies,differentcountrieshavefollowedvastlydifferent
approaches. For example, China officially banned trading in cryptocurrencies and
developed its own central bank digital currency, while El Salvador allowed Bitcoin
as legal tender. In the US the regulatory environment is still in flux and there are
overlapping responsibilities and sometimes even contradictory approaches.
However, there is urgency to provide a clearer regulatory framework for at least
two reasons. First, regulatory certainty is always important for entrepreneurs and in-
vestorswhowishtodecidewhetherandhowtoparticipateinnewtechnologies. Second,
34See, e.g., https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-01-26/wild-crypto-leverage-
on-offer-for-pros-in-20-times-bitcoin-bet.
35https://insidebitcoins.com/news/how-crypto-derivatives-crashed-the-market-do-
prices-signal-buy-now, https://bitcoinmagazine.com/markets/leverage-in-derivates-
market-dipped-bitcoin-price.
38
the exponential growth of cryptocurrencies can lead to a situation where the political
economy of regulation becomes very difficult, if regulators wait too long. In effect,
cryptocurrencies and DeFi applications can become too-big-to-regulate. We showed in
Section 4 that currently many DeFi solutions do not bear the full cost of the external-
ities they impose on the economy, such as enforcing KYC or AML laws or complying
with tax reporting. Part of the current valuation of some cryptocurrencies and DeFi
applications might even be based on an expectation that they will not have to ever
comply with these regulations. Thus, requiring DeFi solutions to start internalizing
these costs will likely result in losses for some of the current investors. As a result,
any such proposals are usually met with strong resistance by the crypto community.
This puts regulators in a difficult position. While they need to safeguard the financial
system, in a democracy there is often populist pressure to forgo doing the things that
aregoodinthelongerruntosatisfyshortrungoals. Infact, thelossesmightbeblamed
on the regulatory action itself, rather than the attempt by regulators to prevent even
larger losses for society going forward.
The main challenges in regulating cryptocurrencies stem from the pseudonymous
and jurisdiction-free nature of this new architecture, which is a consequence of the use
of permissionless blockchain protocols and the smart contracts running on them. The
traditional financial architecture where access runs through centralized intermediaries
allows each country to determine its own regulatory framework and decide for example,
who can open a bank account, what documentation must be supplied, or how informa-
tion can be collected and stored. Also, as the recent geopolitical experience between
Russia and the West shows, the traditional system makes it possible to restrict the
financial system of one country from accessing the financial system of other countries.
TheanonymousandpermissionlessnatureofDeFiappsandtheunderlyingblockchain
protocols have the potential to remove the boundaries between the financial systems
of different countries or even enable citizens to transact in an eco-system that is com-
pletely outside of government regulation or tax enforcement. While financial integra-
tion can have benefits through better risk sharing or improved liquidity it can also have
large costs, if poorly regulated systems undercut better regulated ones in a race to the
bottom. This becomes especially prevalent if different financial systems operate with
vastly different standards.
So what are the available options for regulators? While a complete discussion of all
dimensions of regulation is beyond the scope of this paper, we outline a few key options
for rule-makers. A natural place for regulatory oversight in this new eco-system is at
thelevelofdevelopersandvalidators, whichinturncontrolthenetworkprotocol. Once
this level of regulatory compliance is established, many other functions can be built. In
39
particular, separate entities can be established that would be responsible for verifying
the identities and certifying that crypto addresses belong to confirmed users. These
entities should be subject to regular audits. The protocols can be adjusted so that
validators can check if a particular address belongs to a certified entity and validators
would be charged with only processing transactions that involve certified addresses.
In addition, one could imagine that customers can also be provided with private
keys based on their characteristics, such as financial wealth or sophistication. Smart
contracts can be ranked based on their safety, risk, etc. Rules can be established that
would allow different smart contract categories to interact with customers who can
provide the required key. Smart contracts can be designed to automate the ranking
of other smart contracts and automate the generation of private keys. Cryptography
algorithms can be developed to guard customers privacy. Transitioning to this model
will likely require some time and development of new solutions. Therefore, it would be
important to lay out an appropriate timeline and deadlines so that market participants
can prepare for a smooth transition.
Since countries might differ in how they want to structure their regulatory envi-
ronment for validators, each country can opt to run its own version of the blockchain.
But if some countries agree broadly on regulatory standards, they can use the same
blockchain. Countries that choose to run separate versions of the blockchain can inter-
act with others using interoperability mechanisms such as bridges. The above solution
can be more easily applied to new blockchains. But, if a majority of large countries
agree on coordinated regulation then even the existing blockchains can be brought into
a legal framework without the need to break them up into separate sidechains based
on different regulatory requirements.
The above solution looks similar to a permissioned blockchain, but this system
preserves most of the desired properties of the original design of cryptocurrencies, e.g.,
transactions can be observable on the blockchain, settlement is immediate, and the
same set of smart contracts can be executed on it. In addition, if many countries agree
on regulation validators can be elected so that no country has a monopoly over the
networks. The ability to regulate validators can potentially change the enforcement of
smart contracts, by allowing recourse to the contracting parties. But as we discussed
in Section 2 it can have a positive effect on efficiency.
In contrast, if regulators give up on the ability to oversee validators, the effective-
ness of regulation will be much more limited and will depend on the goodwill and
voluntary cooperation of validators and developers of the blockchain. If validators ac-
cept transactions from every party, the most regulators can hope for is to separate the
network into “regulated” and “unregulated” parts. This could be done by requiring,
40
say, US citizens to interact only with certified DeFi apps, which comply with KYC and
AML regulations and provide reports on trades, tax compliance or other activities.
The relative size of the regulated and unregulated networks will depend on the relative
investment opportunities in these two networks and the ease of moving funds between
them. The problem of regulating compliance only at the level of DApps is that first,
many citizens even from countries that try to regulate DeFi applications, could still
find it attractive to invest funds in the unregulated network to avoid paying taxes,
etc. The ability to evade compliance, can provide a large subsidy for the unregulated
part of DeFi apps. Second, since regulation will have generally a limited bite on the
unregulated part it can harbor many bad actors and facilitate illegal activities. The
opportunities of sidestepping the regulated part will generally increase with the level of
crypto-adoption, since people will be able to predominately interact in the unregulated
part and avoid triggering regulatory compliance.
6. Conclusion
In this article we provide an introduction of how the new DeFi architecture works
and the mechanics behind it. We also lay out some of the potential benefits and
challenges of the developing new system and present a comparison to the traditional
system of financial intermediation. In our discussion we focus on the economic forces
andfrictionsthatcanarisewithinthissystemandtheregulatoryapproachesthatmight
help to mitigate the problems. Our analysis highlights that while the DeFi architecture
might have the potential to reduce transaction costs, it is not an automatic solution to
the problem of rents in the financial sector. But it may also create additional problems.
We identify as a key challenge to regulators, the permissionless and anonymous nature
of the current DeFi blockchains. These provide the opportunity for market participants
to circumvent controls in the financial system, and create externalities for the rest of
society, for example through facilitating tax evasion or skirting of AML laws.
We highlight that there are ways to regulate the DeFi system which would preserve
a majority of features of the blockchain architecture but support accountability and
regulatory compliance. These solutions would rely on a system where validators on
the blockchain agree to check if a particular address belongs to a certified entity and
validators would be charged with only processing transactions that involve certified
addresses.
How this system evolves, in terms of technology and regulation has important con-
sequencesforliquidityandcreditprovisiontotheeconomy, andultimatelythestanding
of the US and other global economies. There are also strategic and competitive im-
41
plications across countries. The US obtains significant economic and strategic benefits
from the central role that the dollar and the US financial system hold internationally.
Therefore, it is in the US interest to encourage innovation and modern financial tech-
nologies but at the same time to set standards that protect consumers and maintain
the transparency, accountability and stability of the system. The cross-jurisdictional
structure of permissionless blockchain ledgers entails a danger that participants will
engage in regulatory arbitrage which would undermine the financial system and its
stability. Coordination between the main financial markets will be important to pre-
vent a hollowing-out of financial regulations.
42
References
Allen, F., Carletti, E., and Gu, X. (2019). The Roles of Banks in Financial Systems.
In Berger, A. N., Molyneux, P., and Wilson, J. O. S., editors, The Oxford Handbook
of Banking, Oxford Handbooks. Oxford University Press, 3rd edition.
Aoyagi, J. (2020). Liquidity Provision by Automated Market Makers. Available at
SSRN 3674178.
Aoyagi, J. and Ito, Y. (2021). Liquidity Implication of Constant Product Market
Makers. Available at SSRN 3808755.
Aramonte, S., Huang, W., and Schrimpf, A. (2021). DeFi risks and the decentralisation
illusion. BIS Quarterly Review.
Auer, R. and Claessens, S. (2020). Cryptocurrency Market Reactions to Regulatory
News. Globalization Institute Working Paper 381, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Bartlett, R. and Talley, E. (2017). Law and Corporate Governance. In The Handbook
of the Economics of Corporate Governance, volume 1, pages 177–234. Elsevier.
Beniiche, A. (2020). A Study of Blockchain Oracles. arXiv:2004.07140.
Berg, T., Puri, M., and Rocholl, J. (2020). Loan Officer Incentives, Internal Rating
Models, and Default Rates. Review of Finance, 24(3):529–578.
Biais, B., Bisiere, C., Bouvard, M., and Casamatta, C. (2019). The blockchain folk
theorem. The Review of Financial Studies, 32(5):1662–1715.
Bier, J. (2021). The Blocksize War: The Battle Over Who Controls Bitcoin’s Protocol
Rules. Independently Published.
Boot, A. W. A. and Thakor, A. V. (2015). Financial System Architecture. The Review
of Financial Studies, 10(3):693–733.
Budish, E. (2018). TheEconomicLimitsofBitcoin and theBlockchain. WorkingPaper
24717, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Caldarelli, G. and Ellul, J. (2021). The Blockchain Oracle Problem in Decentralized
Finance—A Multivocal Approach. Applied Sciences, 11(16).
Campbell, J. Y. (2016). Restoring rational choice: The challenge of consumer financial
regulation. American Economic Review, 106(5):1–30.
43
Capponi, A. and Jia, R. (2021). The Adoption of Blockchain-based Decentralized
Exchanges. arXiv:2103.08842.
C´el´erier, C. and Vall´ee, B. (2017). Catering to Investors Through Security Design:
Headline Rate and Complexity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3):1469–
1508.
Cong, L. W. and He, Z. (2019). Blockchain Disruption and Smart Contracts. The
Review of Financial Studies, 32(5):1754–1797.
Cong, L. W., He, Z., and Li, J. (2020). Decentralized Mining in Centralized Pools. The
Review of Financial Studies, 34(3):1191–1235.
Cong, L. W. and Xiao, Y. (2021). Categories and Functions of Crypto-Tokens. In
Pompella, M. and Matousek, R., editors, The Palgrave Handbook of FinTech and
Blockchain, pages 267–284. Springer.
Ferreira, D., Li, J., and Nikolowa, R. (2019). Corporate Capture of Blockchain Gover-
nance. Working Paper 593, European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI).
Gorton, G.B.(2021). TheOrkneySlewandCentralBankDigitalCurrencies. Available
at SSRN 3937323.
Gorton, G. B. and Zhang, J. (2021). Taming Wildcat Stablecoins. Available at SSRN
3888752.
Halaburda,H.,He,Z.,andLi,J.(2021). Aneconomicmodelofconsensusondistributed
ledgers. Working Paper 29515, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Harvey, C. R. (2016). Cryptofinance. Available at SSRN 2438299.
Harvey, C. R., Ramachandran, A., and Santoro, J. (2021). DeFi and the Future of
Finance. John Wiley & Sons, Newark.
Hermalin, B. and Weisbach, M. (2017). The Handbook of the Economics of Corporate
Governance. Elsevier.
Huberman, G., Leshno, J. D., and Moallemi, C. (2021). Monopoly without a Monopo-
list: AnEconomicAnalysisoftheBitcoinPaymentSystem. The Review of Economic
Studies, 88(6):3011–3040.
Kogias, E. K., Jovanovic, P., Gailly, N., Khoffi, I., Gasser, L., and Ford, B. (2016).
Enhancing Bitcoin Security and Performance with Strong Consistency via Collective
44
Signing. In Proceedings of the 25th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium,
SEC’16, pages 279–296. USENIX Association.
La Porta, R., de Silanes, F. L., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. (2000). Investor Protection
and Corporate Governance. Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1):3–27.
Laibson, D., Repetto, A., and Tobacman, J. (2007). Estimating Discount Functions
with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle. Working Paper 13314, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research.
Lehar, A. and Parlour, C. A. (2021). Decentralized Exchanges. Available at SSRN
3905316. Working paper, University of Calgary and University of California, Berke-
ley.
Lusardi, A. and Mitchell, O. S. (2007). Financial Literacy and Retirement Prepared-
ness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education. Business Economics,
42(1):35–44.
Makarov, I.andSchoar, A.(2021). BlockchainAnalysisoftheBitcoinMarket. Working
Paper 29396, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Merton, R. C. (1995). A Functional Perspective of Financial Intermediation. Financial
Management, 24(2):23–41.
Platt, M., Sedlmeir, J., Platt, D., Tasca, P., Xu, J., Vadgama, N., and Iban˜ez, J. I.
(2021). Energy Footprint of Blockchain Consensus Mechanisms Beyond Proof-of-
Work. arXiv:2109.03667.
Prasad,E.S.(2021). The Future of Money: How the Digital Revolution is Transforming
Currencies and Finance. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Roe, M. J. (2020). Stock Market Short-Termism’s Impact. Law Working Paper
426/2018, European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI).
Ru, H.andSchoar, A.(2016). DoCreditCardCompaniesScreenforBehavioralBiases?
Working Paper 22360, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Scha¨r, F. (2021). Decentralized Finance: On Blockchain- and Smart Contract-Based
Financial Markets. Review, 103(2):153–174.
Werbach, K. (2018). The Blockchain and the New Architecture of Trust. The MIT
Press.
45
Werbach, K. and Cornell, N. (2017). Contracts Ex Machina. Duke Law Journal,
67:313–382.
Wright, A. and De Filippi, P. (2015). Decentralized Blockchain Technology and the
Rise of Lex Cryptographia. Available at SSRN 2580664.
46
Figures
Figure 1: Average transaction fee and price for Bitcoin and Ethereum. This figure shows
thedailytransactionfeesandclosingpricesforBitcoinandEthereumfromJanuary2017toFebruary
2022. Daily closing prices are plotted on the left-axis and daily average transaction fees are plotted
on the right axis. The figures are plotted in log-scale. Data source: Messari.io. Authors’ calculations.
Figure 2: Share of market capitalization by token categories. This figure shows the share of
marketcapitalizationbysevencategoriesofcryptocurrencytokensandcoins(herewecollectivelyrefer
to them as tokens) as of February 2022. Smart Contract Platform include tokens for platforms that
hostsmartcontractsontheirownblockchains. Stablecoinreferstotokensthatarepeggedtoaspecific
assetsuchasfiatcurrency. dAppincludestokensusedfordifferentdecentralizedapplicationprotocols.
NFT refers to non-fungible tokens. Other refers to the rest of the cryptocurrency tokens that cannot
be classified to the categories listed above. Data source: CoinGecko. Authors’ calculations.
47
Figure 3: Share of market capitalization by stablecoin categories. These figures show the
share of market capitalization by stablecoin categories as of February 2022. Panel A shows the share
of stablecoins backed by traditional assets comparing to those backed by crypto-assets. Stablecoins
backed by crypto-assets include those algorithmically backed by a particular cryptocurrency or by
multiple tokens such as tokens in a liquidity pool. Panel B shows the share of top stablecoins backed
bytraditionalassets. PanelCshowstheshareoftopstablecoinsbackedbycrypto-assets. Datasource:
CoinGecko. Authors’ calculations.
Figure 4: Market capitalization and total value locked of decentralized finance. These
figures show the market capitalization and total value locked for different categories of decentralized
financefromJanuary2019toFebruary2022. Tradingreferstotokensusedindecentralizedexchanges
including those for spot trade and derivative exchanges. Lending and borrowing refers to DeFi plat-
formswherelendersaddfundsintoliquiditypoolsinreturnforaregularinterestratefromborrowers.
Yield Farming includes yield aggregators and protocols that incentive people to deposit or lend out
their tokens in exchange of rewards. Panel A shows the market capitalization of the tokens in billion
USDandPanelBshowsthetotalvaluelockedinbillionUSD.Datasource: marketcapitalizationdata
comes from CoinGecko and total value locked data comes from Defi Llama. Authors’ calculations.
48
Figure 5: Market capitalization and total value locked of decentralized lending. These
figures show the market capitalization and total value locked for the top 20 lending protocols based
on market capitalization from May 2020 to February 2022. Panel A shows the market capitalization
of the tokens in billion USD and Panel B shows the total value locked in billion USD. Data source:
marketcapitalizationdatacomesfromCoinGeckoandtotalvaluelockeddatacomesfromDefiLlama.
Authors’ calculations.
Figure 6: Initial Coin Offering Insider Share. This figure shows the insider shares from top 50
tokens’ ICOs. Insider share includes tokens to founding teams and developers, early investors such as
seed investors, venture capital firms, and private sale investors, and associated entities which include
companiesthatarerelatedtotheprotocolsorprotocolfounders. Insiderssharesdonotincludeshares
that go into the community such as airdrops, grants, rewards, and tokens to public sale investors,
and shares for the development of protocols, such as those going into foundations and reserves. Data
source: Messari.io. Authors’ calculations.
49
Table 1: Concentration of validator stakes
This table reports the concentration of validator stakes for the top ten proof-of-stake
smartcontractplatformsbymarketcapitalizationasofFebruary2022. Validatorstakes
include stakes provided by validator themselves and stakes delegated to validators.
Column 2 shows the amount staked as a percentage of circulating supply. Column 3
and 4 show the amount staked for the top 10 and 50 validators as a share of total
amount staked on the platform. The data exclude Ethereum since it is in a transition
period. Data source: Stakingrewards.com and author’s calculations.
Amount staked as a (%) Validator Concentration
Cryptocurrency
of circulating supply top 10 top 50
Solana 70% 23% 56%
Cardano 73% 30% 47%
Avalanche 97% 17% 57%
Terra 77% 36% 76%
Polkadot 57% 30% 56%
Cosmos Hub 63% 45% 87%
NEAR Protocol 61% 50% 96%
Polygon 34% 72% 99%
Fantom 54% 88% 100%
Tezos 76% 63% 96%
50
Table 2: Top validators
This table reports the top 15 PoS validators and their aggregate stakes in the top ten
proof-of-stake smart contract platforms by market capitalization as of February 2022.
Validator stakes include stakes provided by validator themselves and stakes delegated
to validators. Column 2 shows the aggregate dollar amount staked. Column 3 shows
validators market share. Data source: Stakingrewards.com and author’s calculations.
Validator Staked USD Share
Everstake 2.8 B 2.20%
Binance Staking 2.6 B 2.10%
Chorus One 1.6 B 1.30%
Dokia Capital 1.6 B 1.30%
Certus One 1.5 B 1.20%
Bison Trails 1.5 B 1.20%
Allnodes 1.5 B 1.20%
InfStones 1.5 B 1.20%
Kraken 1.4 B 1.10%
Staked 1.2 B 1.00%
P2P Validator 1.2 B 1.00%
Orion.Money 1.1 B 0.90%
B-Harvest 1.0 B 0.80%
Staking Facilities 1.0 B 0.80%
Figment 1.0 B 0.80%
51
Appendix
Figures
Figure A.1: Market capitalization of top non-smart contract cryptocurrencies. These
figures show the market capitalization of top non-smart contract cryptocurrencies and the rest from
January 2019 to February 2022. The top seven cryptocurrencies include Bitcoin, Dogecoin, Litecoin,
Bitcoin Cash, Dash, and Decdred. Panel A shows the market capitalization of the tokens in billion
USD and the Panel B shows their corresponding percentages as a share of market capitalization for
all cryptocurrencies. Data source: CoinGecko. Authors’ calculations.
Figure A.2: Market capitalization of top smart contract platforms. These figures show
the market capitalization of top five smart contract platforms and the rest from January 2019 to
February 2022. The coins for the top five smart contract platforms are Ethereum, Binance Coin,
Solana,Cardano,andPolkadot. PanelAshowsthemarketcapitalizationofthetokensinbillionUSD
and the Panel B shows their corresponding percentages as a share of market capitalization for all
smart contract platforms. Data source: CoinGecko. Authors’ calculations.
52
Figure A.3: Total value locked on top smart contract platforms. This figure shows the
multi-chain total value locked by top smart contract platforms from January 2021 to February 2022.
Data source: Defi Llama. Authors’ calculations.
FigureA.4: Dailyspottradevolumeforcentralizedexchangescomparedtodecentralized
exchanges. Thisfigureshowsthedailyspottradevolumeforcentralizedanddecentralizedexchanges
from January 2020 to February 2022. The figure is plotted in log-scale. Data source: The Block.
Authors’ calculations.
53
2021 Top 10 Centralized Exchanges (CEX)
CEXestrading volume climbed slightly before dipping further in December
Top 10 CEX Trading Volume Breakdown in 2021
+36
Total Trading Volume($ Trillion) %
M Shar ak re et $1.2T $1.6T $1.4T $2.3T $3.2T $1.3T $0.8T $1.4T $1.8T $1.8T $2.1T $1.6T Top
G
r1 o0
w
C tE hX
f
rT oo mta Ql T 3r a tod i Qng
4
V 2o 0l 2u 1me
100%
789 000 %%% 11 30 %% 18 3% % 17 3% % 15 4% % 18 3% % 3 1. 72 2%3 %% 4 1. 72 2%1 %% 4 1. 83 2 2%% 2 %% 4. 963 9 %%% 5% 4 1. 54 7 0%% 1 %% 4 1. 65 5 0%% 4 %% 5. 986 3 %%% 1% T t v t tr roo o i il ltp l l lua i i- o ol1 m n n 0 o e iif n nc $e i n DN5n e. Q ot 5r cv4a 5 ee l mi 2 mtz r 0e bi b2ld el e1i re o r. x (n bQ -c 2 e4h s 1fpa op %n o re e )g t a . e fkt as r e l a d lr ide n aic gn to tg $r o 2d $.e 0 1d 7 . 6 a 4
60% 16% 16% 18% 18% 15% 12% 12% 12% 11% 12% 14% Binance’smarket sharefell to42.7%at
50% 18% 11% 9% 8% the end of Q4 asglobal regulatory scrutiny
7% onthe exchange continued.
40%
23 00 %% 45% 50% 55% 55% 51% 53% 55% 52% 48% 48% 48% 43% H 5 sh0u a%o rb eii n’ bs yQm v4a o, r le uk ne mdt eis n h aga m tr he oe ns gqh ur ta han r et k e to rb pwy - 1in t 0he Ca a E r 7l Xy % s .
202101% Top 10 Decentralized Exchanges (DEX) Remarkably, Crypto.com has emerged as
the quarter's biggest dark horse,
0% increasing its market share from an
TradingJ avnoluFmebes oMafr TopAp r10 DMaEyXesJunskyrJuolckeAtuegd aStep theO ectnd Noofv theDe cyearaverage of0.5% permonth in the first
Binance Huobi OKEx Coinbase Crypto.com FTX KuCoin Kraken Bitfinex Gate.io Bitmart Gemini half of 2021 to 7.8%in December.
Data source: CoinGecko
Top-10 CEX as of 1 July 2021 –Binance, HuobTi, oCopin b1as0e , DCrEypXto .Tcorma, dFTiXn, OgK EVx, oKrlaukemn, Beit fBinrexe, Baitkmdarot, wGenmi niin 2021 CoinGecko +2021 Y6ear En7d Cryptocurrency Report 42
Top-10 CEX as of 1 January 2022 –Binance, Huobi, Coinbase, Crypto.com, FTX, OKEx, KuCoin, Kraken, Bitfinex, Gate.io %
Total Trading Volume($ Trillion)
M Shar ak re et 77B 97B 101B 167B 309B 161B 72B 119B 123B 139B 196B 187B VoT lo up m 1 e0 G D rE oX we ts h T fro ota ml T Qr 3a d toin Qg 4
10 6789 00000% %%%% 11 87 01 %% %% 11 56 50 %% %% 1585 0%% %
%
1745 4%%%
%
845 %%% 6477 %%%% 1 875 2 %%% % 9598 %%%% 14884 0%%%%
%
1555 2%%%
%
848 %%
%
1 643 %%% O S C
P
0p aor xo nc ma go p ok oy lius nw ndap T 2
t
Dro 0 Ea2p Xd1 e1
i n
sr0 e
g
vD c ovoE
lo
uX r lde mues
m
eds
se
p a
.
so ktt o y2 t tr r0 aa o2 d l
c
1 i o kn f eg t$ v e5o d2l 2u
in
m b ie ll iin o nQ 4 in
50% 17% 20% 25% 32% 47% 33% 19 5% % 17% 17% 19% 26% 1 79 %% B Da on dc oor N j $u 1o m 8v 7pe Bem d rb efr se o pr m ea c n t$ id v1 e2D l3 ye B .c e inm Sb ee pr t w toh $e 1re 9 6it B and
34 00 %% 10% 12% 12% 12% 13% RW aa ydu il utS mwap
Uniswapmaintained its position as the
SushiSwap top DEX(V2 and V3 protocol), with 44.1%
20% 39% 37% 40% 30% 19% 28% 37% 33% 32% 31% 29% 40% PancakeSwap V1 market share through out Q4 2021
10%
Uniswap V2
9% Since launch, Trader Joe has expanded its
0% Uniswap V3 market share quickly, while Sushiswap’s
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec market share has notably declined.
Data source: CoinGecko
Figure A.5: ExchanT T Ro o ep p fg e- - r1 1 t0 0 oe D D CE E oX X i na ac Gs s eo oo cf f k 1 1 o N Dn Qeo ucv aeec rmm tebb ree le yrr R22n e00 p22 o11t r – t– QUrU 2nn ii 2ass w 0w 2aat 1pp a (( vi nv 33 do)) ,, Q UU unnn aii s ts eww ra.a lypp R (( evv 2 pT2 ) o) ,, r PP t aah Qnn 3cc aa 2ekk 0ee 2sSS 1ww feaa opp r T(( vv ofi22 p)) , -, 1SSg 0uu ss dhuh eii cSS ewwr naa tp rpe a,, lTT is zrr eaa ddd ee esrr x cJJ oho hee a,, n RoR gaa eyy swdd rii euu bmm a,, l t aCC nuuh crr evv e se ,,e f S rS opp moo oto Jkk ayyo nSS uww apaa rp yp ,, t C oO o dr Smc ea pp,e t oC eu mocnm bd epe F ro inunan nd c tF ei ,nr Qa unaic ce klSwiazpedex Coc inh Geca kon 202g 1 Ye eas r En( d CD ryptE ocurX renc) y Report 43
and centralized exchanges’ (CEX) monthly trading volume concentration in 2021. Data source:
CoinGecko Yearly Report 2021.
54
Figure A.6: Tokens supplied and borrowed. This figure shows the aggregated deposit and
borrowing of the top 15 tokens for the top three lending protocols in million USD: Aave, MakerDAO,
and Compound as of February 25, 2022. Data source: protocol statistics. Authors’ calculations.
https://app.aave.com/markets, https://compound.finance/markets, https://daistats.com
55
Figure A.7: Platform transaction fees. This figure shows the total fees and revenues in 2021 for
Level-1 blokchains and two payment networks: Visa and Stripe. Source: The Year in Ethereum 2021:
https://stark.mirror.xyz/q3OnsK7mvfGtTQ72nfoxLyEV5lfYOqUfJIoKBx7BG1I.
Figure A.8: Monthly Spot vs. Derivatives Volume. This figure shows the monthly spot and
derivatives trade volume in USD from February 2020 to January 2022. Data source: Cryptocompare
Exchange Review, January 2022.
56
Tables
Table A.1: Blockchain 51% Attacks
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Bitcoin SV Aug 5, 2021 No \ The BSV team claimed that the attack was thwarted and all fraud-
(BSV) ulent chains identified.
Bitcoin SV Aug 3, 2021 Yes Unknown The BSV team recommended that node operators invalidate the
(BSV) fraudulent chain. The Bitcoin Association collected evidence of the
illegal activity and its representatives worked with law enforcement
authorities in affected jurisdictions.
Bitcoin SV Jun 24, 2021 - Yes Unknown Several crypto exchanges suspended BSV transactions, deposits and
(BSV) Jul 9, 2021 withdrawals. After the July 6 block reorganization, the BSV team
discovered the malicious nature of the activity, then took mitigat-
ing and preventative measures. The exchange Bitmart later claimed
that the attacker had deposited “fake” BSV, traded them for other
coins, and moved those coins to other exchanges. On July 23, Bit-
mart filed for injunctive relief in the Court seeking to prevent fur-
ther transfers and asking for other exchanges to freeze coins they
received from the attacker. Binance announced a shut-down of its
BSV mining pool scheduled for July 31.
57
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Verge Feb 15, 2021 No \ Bittrex paused the XVG wallet. The Verge team said the attack
(XVG) was thwarted and failed.
Firo (FIRO, Jan 18, 2021 Yes $4.5 million but Exchanges paused deposits and withdrawals. The Firo team issued
formerly more than 70% of an emergency switch to temporarily disable Lelantus to prevent the
Zcoin) the FIRO was attacker from anonymizing funds. They also released a hotfix as a
recovered preventive measure on Jan 21, asking all wallets and masternodes
be upgraded. The price of FIRO dropped -16.51% on January 21.
The Firo team locked the attacker’s proceeds and suspected that
this attack was not financially motivated. The Firo community
voted to support reimbursing exchanges with the locked funds. The
funds were returned to Binance. The Firo team expedited activa-
tion of ChainLocks, a secondary validation layer, and deloyed it on
Jan 28.
58
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Aeternity Dec 5, 2020 - Yes more than Huobi timely paused all the AE deposits and withdrawals and
(AE) Jan 8, 2021 $5,000,000 but all alerted the AE team on Dec 7, shortly after the attacker broad-
the stolen AE casted the new chain. Binance delisted AE on Dec 30. The AE
were recovered team found that this attack targeted specific exchanges (OKEx,
later Huobi, Gate.IO and Binance) in their investigations. The AE com-
munity members helped to mitigate the 51% attack by renting
hashing power to mine in the community fork. On Jan 3, the Ae-
ternity Community Telegram group was attacked. The AE team
claimed that they thwarted the attacker’s attempt to roll back ex-
change transactions on Jan 8, and recovered the 29 million stolen
AE tokens. The AE team also announced their plan about imple-
menting Hyperchains, which are PoS systems that rely on existing
PoW blockchains to prevent 51% attacks.
Bitcoin Nov 28, 2020 Yes Unknown Given that the attack was not financially motivated but for protest-
Cash ABC ing a new miner tax, the unknown attackers could not sustain this
(BCHA, attack. BCHA’s price was not adversely affected by the attack.
now eCash)
59
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Grin Nov 7, 2020 Unknown Unknown The motivation for this attack remains unclear. The develop-
(GRIN) ment team put a warning on its website for the sudden increase of
hashrate which coincided with the Nicehash rate doubling outside of
known pools. It also suggested extra confirmations on transactions.
The price of GRIN remained relatively unchanged after the news of
51% threat broke.
Ethereum Aug 29, 2020 Yes Unknown The series of attacks had no significant impact on the price of ETC.
Classic On Aug 31, the ETC team announced that they would pursue en-
(ETC) forcement and regulation of hash rental. On Sep 1, NiceHash ac-
knowledged its hash-power rental platform may have facilitated the
attacks. The ETC later implemented an Modified Exponential Sub-
jective Scoring (MESS) solution to reduce the likelihood of future
51% attacks.
Ethereum Aug 6, 2020 Yes Unknown Bitfly and Binance reported the block reorganization and halted
Classic ETC transactions, withdrawals, and deposits. The exchange OKEx
(ETC) said it would consider delisting ETC due to the network’s severe
lack of security. Coinbase extended deposit and withdrawal confir-
mation times for ETC to roughly two weeks. The ETC team an-
nounced a security plan on Aug 19.
60
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Ethereum Jul 29, 2020 - Yes $5,600,000 The blockchain analytics firm Bitquery reported investigations that
Classic Aug 1, 2020 debunked the ETC team’s initial statement of no attack.
(ETC)
Bitcoin Jul 1, 2020 No \ Besides warnings, the BTG team privately supplied mining pools
Gold and exchanges with an updated version of the BTG network which
(BTG) has a checkpoint that automatically rejected the attacker’s chain.
Bitcoin Jan 23, 2020 - Yes $72,000 BTG’s market price went up about 18 percent over 24 hours after
Gold Jan 24, 2020 news of the attack broke. In a white paper, the BTG team pro-
(BTG) posed a new soft fork approach, Cross-Chain Block Notarization
Protocol, to prevent future 51% attacks.
Vertcoin Dec 1, 2019 No \ The motivation for this attack remains unclear. Bittrex, possibly
(VTC) the original target of the attack, disabled its wallet before the reor-
ganized blocks were published, thus prevented the potential double-
spend. The VTC developer blamed Nicehash for their hashpower
rental services.
Expanse Jul 29, 2019 Yes $12 This attack received little news coverage. Only a former researcher
(EXP) at the MIT Digital Currency Initiative disclosed it on github.
61
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Litecoin Jul 4, 2019 - Yes $5,500 This attack received little news coverage. Only a former researcher
Cash Jul 7, 2019 at the MIT Digital Currency Initiative disclosed it on github.
(LCC)
Ethereum Jan 5, 2019 - Yes $1,100,000 The ETC team initially claimed there was no attack but later con-
Classic Jan 7, 2019 firmed it. Coinbase published a report on the attack and paused
(ETC) all ETC transactions, withdrawals and deposits. ETC had a near
10% depreciation on Jan 7. The blockchain security firm SlowMist
found the attacker returned stolen funds to the YoBit and Gate.io
exchanges on Jan 10.
Vertcoin Oct 12, 2018 - Yes more than Coinbase published a report that provids many details on the time-
(VTC) Dec 2, 2018 $100,000 line and financial losses of this series of attacks. The VTC developer
blamed cloud-mining services such as Nicehash.
AurumCoin Nov 9, 2018 Yes $550,000 The Aurum Coin team put all the blame on the exchange Cryp-
(AU) topia, and claimed that the AU team is not responsible to the loss
because AurumCoin is an open-source distributed crypto currency.
Cryptopia did not even acknowledge the loss.
62
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Pigeoncoin Sep 27, 2018 Yes $15,000 The PGN developers patched the bug that was exploited in the at-
(PGN) tack. Because PGN is a copycat crypto currency, the bug was orig-
inally from the Bitcoin source code which was already fixed on Sep
19. Trading resumed on Oct 2.
Ravencoin Sep 13, 2018 - Yes Unknown The Ravencoin team reported their findings and solutions on Sep
(RVN) Sep 14, 2018 18. They chose to implement a default maximum reorg depth with
specific node conditions as a solution to prevent future 51% attacks.
They also released a hotfix for a bug that was inherited from Bit-
coin source code which allows double-spend attacks using the chain
on Sep 21.
FLO Sep 8, 2018 Yes $27,500 Bittrex disabled the wallet after the double-spend and alerted
Blockchain the FLO team. The FLO team decided to repay the approximate
(FLO) 700,000 FLO stolen from Bittrex and asked the FLO community for
donations. To mitigate 51% attacks and protect the network, the
FLO team initially planned to implement Sunny King’s advanced
checkpointing system, but later chose to add the more applicable
max reorg depth consensus rules to FLO instead of using the cen-
tral checkpoint mechanism.
63
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
ZenCash Jun 2, 2018 Yes more than The ZenCash team announced that they had taken mitigating ac-
(ZEN, now $600,000 tions, contacted exchanges to increase confirmation times, and con-
Horizen) ducted forensic analysis soon after receiving warning from a pool
operator. On June 3, the Zen team released an official statement
about the attack on their website.
Litecoin May 30, 2018 Yes Unknown The exchange YoBit tweeted that a 51% attack on LCC was iden-
Cash tified. The LCC team alerted exchanges to increase confirmation
(LCC) requirements, and announced that there would possibly be a hard
fork. Some news reports implied that the loss was minor in this at-
tack. Later in a white paper, the LCC team proposed a new hybrid
PoW/PoS solution, “The Hive”, that aims to protect the network
against 51% attackers.
Verge May 22, 2018 Yes more than After attackers exploited the same weakness as the previous April
(XVG) $1,700,000 attack, Verge tried to downplay it as a DDos attack on some mining
pools. The price of XVG dropped significantly after the attack.
Bitcoin May 16, 2018 - Yes $18,000,000 The BTG team updated its mining algorithm in June 2018 in order
Gold May 19, 2018 to add an immediate measure of safety from 51% attacks. Although
(BTG) the BTG team warned exchanges about the attack, the exchange
Bittrex asked BTG team to pay for their loss. BTG refused to pay
and was delisted from Bittrex later in September 2018.
64
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
MonaCoin May 13, 2018 - Yes $90,000 Many exchanges halted deposits of Monacoin after the news of at-
(MONA) May 15, 2018 tack. The Monacoin developer advised exchanges to increase con-
firmations to 100. Some news report stated that the attacker had
been attempting to exploit a weakness in the Monacoin’s difficulty
adjustment mechanism for six months prior to this attack being de-
tected.
Verge Apr 4, 2018 Yes $15,000 The problem was temporarily fixed with an emergency commit
(XVG) posted by the lead Verge developer, because the attackers used a
weakness in the Verge code to falsify time stamps on blocks. Critics
said that the vulnerability remains unfixed after the blockchain was
hard-forked. The Verge team tried to downplay the severity of the
attack on social medias.
Elec- Apr 1, 2018 Yes Unknown It was first noticed because a massive amount of empty blocks were
troneum constantly mined on the currency’s blockchain. Some ETN commu-
(ETN) nity members suspected that the attacker was Bitmain, who seemed
to have large proportion of network hashrate at that time. This at-
tack affected the Electroneum for a while, but Electroneum eventu-
ally moved on.
65
Coin Date Succeeded? Loss in USD After the Attack
Krypton Aug 26, 2016 Yes $3,000 The attackers demanded a ransom, which Krypton declined to pay.
(KR) Krypton tried to turn to the PoS consensus mechanism to prevent
future attacks, but the project was terminated a few months later.
Terracoin Jul 24, 2013 Yes Unknown Terracoin’s price collapsed. The exchange Bter annouced that the
(TRC) attacker withdrew about 50 BTC value before the account was dis-
abled.
Feathercoin Jun 8, 2013 - Yes $1,400 Feathercoin later adopted an Advanced Checkpointing (ACP) fea-
(FTC) Jun 10, 2013 ture to protect against 51% attacks. The checkpoint master node is
deployed and maintained by the lead FTC developer.
Coiledcoin Jan 6, 2012 Yes Unknown The 51% attack killed CoiledCoin for non-financial reasons. Some
(CLC) community members accused Luke-Jr, a Bitcoin Core developer and
the founder of Eligis mining pool, of using the pool resources to at-
tack Coiledcoin. Luke-Jr denied it. But he stated that CoiledCoin
was a scam that would discredit and harm Bitcoin’s reputation.
66
“Cryptocurrencies and Decentralized Finance”
Bank for International Settlements 21st Annual Conference
June 24, 2022
Tobias Adrian
My remarks today will focus on the risks and opportunities presented by crypto assets in an overall
context of central banking in a post-Covid world. And with the volatile crypto market continuing to make
headlines these days, it makes sense to focus on some of the risks of decentralized finance, or “DeFi,”
which can be amplified by the volatility. To supplement the discussion, it will be useful to include a brief
recap of the recent collapse of the stablecoin TerraUSD, which provides a useful example of the
underlying risks of DeFi.
Cryptocurrencies carry with them a number of specific risks, such as market risks, liquidity risks, and
cyber risks. Each of these can also apply to DeFi, and I will discuss each in turn. However, DeFi also
presents significant opportunities. Without the need for a central entity and the accompanying labor and
operational costs, DeFi has the potential to improve financial intermediation by enhancing efficiency and
stability. These positive effects could also materialize through the increased competition brought on as
DeFi providers enter markets traditionally occupied by conventional financial institutions.
What are the risks?
In general, digital assets are like the traditional ones that came before them in that they are subject to
market risks, where the asset may appreciate or depreciate in value depending on the prevailing
conditions in the market. When it comes to DeFi, market risks reflect a heavy reliance on crypto collateral.
And the high volatility of crypto asset prices can often lead to frequent (forced) liquidation of DeFi lending.
Interestingly, the volume of liquidation increases not only when the crypto price drops but also when it
increases sharply. Collateral shortages can occur either when the price of collateral is decreasing or
when the value of borrowing is increasing.
The recent spike in liquidation was due to the collapse of TerraUSD, which affected its DeFi lending
platform, known as Anchor. In May of this year, total liquidation was around $1.4 billion, but $1.3 billion of
this came from Anchor. Compared to May 2021—where we witnessed over $700 million in liquidation—in
this most recent round in May 2022, liquidation from other platforms was much smaller, as outstanding
debt also collapsed.
Turning now to liquidity risks, these tend to arise due to the high concentration of liquidity providers in any
given segment of the market. Indeed, only a handful of accounts make up nearly half of the total liquidity
of DeFi platforms.
Borrowers from DeFi platforms can repay the debt at any time. However, borrowers must always meet the
collateral requirements. Suppose at any time a borrower’s collateral requirement falls below the required
threshold as a result of adverse price movements. In that case, liquidation can be triggered by a liquidator
who repays the debt and acquires the collateral in exchange for rewards—the liquidation bonus.
Finally, cyber risks, and in particular cyberattacks, are a critical risk for DeFi. The value of stolen crypto
assets by cyberattacks increased substantially in 2021. The total value stolen in DeFi-related
cyberattacks went from less than $100 million per quarter in 2020 to over $900 million in just the third
quarter alone in 2021. And in most cases, over 30 percent of deposits were lost entirely—either because
they were stolen by the attack or as a result of depositor withdrawals.
These attacks undermine the platform’s reputation and induce a massive amount of deposit withdrawals,
which can trigger a liquidity shortage on the platform. Taken to the extreme, the effects of a serious attack
can be so severe so as to shut down a platform.
New opportunities
Although DeFi has many risks, it also brings some opportunities. Chief among these, DeFi can potentially
reduce costs of financial intermediation by bypassing and shortcutting the intermediation chain.
The left panel of the chart compares the estimated marginal costs of DeFi platforms and traditional
financial institutions. As you can clearly see, the marginal cost of DeFi is much lower than the other banks
and nonbanks in both advanced and emerging market economies, meaning DeFi is cost-efficient in
lending. The low marginal costs incurred by the DeFi platforms are due to their automated and
unregulated operation. Unlike traditional financial institutions, DeFi platforms do not bear labor and
operational costs, because all aspects of the lending process are already automated using algorithms and
interest rate models.
However, this efficiency is still subject to high vulnerabilities. As depicted in the left panel, the gray areas
are margins. The margins of DeFi are very small compared to the others. DeFi charges substantially
lower margins compared to the traditional financial institutions, offering favorable prices to borrowers and
high deposit rates to depositors, so that they can attract borrowers and depositors, while keeping their
margins low. This is in part possible because DeFi doesn’t have to maintain regulatory buffers. But such
low margins also raise concerns about under-pricing risks.
2
The right panel of the chart assesses margins against risk exposures. The estimated (average) expected
losses of DeFi platforms are compared with those of banks. This depiction suggests that, given the same
risk exposure, the DeFi margins are too low. Or, the other way round, DeFi is significantly underpricing
their risks.
A paper by Igor Makarov and Antoinette Schoar on cryptocurrencies and DeFi suggests these lower
marginal costs could be offset by higher upfront costs. As they state in the paper, given smart contracts
do not allow for ex-post renegotiation or cancelation, the contract must be completed ex-ante. It therefore
requires higher upfront costs of negotiating and specifying the precise terms of an agreement in all
possible states of the world.
The collapse of TerraUSD (UST)
The aforementioned risks and vulnerabilities were proven when the third-largest stablecoin TerraUSD
(UST) collapsed on May 9. Let me briefly explain what happened during the collapse and its effect on the
market.
UST is an algorithm-stablecoin pegged to the US dollar. Algorithm-based stablecoins attempt to maintain
a stable value via protocols that provide for the increase or decrease of the supply of the stablecoins in
response to changes in demand.
However, unlike other cash or short-term asset-backed stablecoins, UST is designed to maintain its peg
through arbitrage trading between UST and its sister crypto asset, LUNA, both of which are built on Terra
blockchain. The protocol guarantees users the ability to trade 1 UST for $1 worth of LUNA regardless of
the value of either token. The left panel of the chart depicts the nature of this relationship. When the value
of 1 UST is higher than 1 US dollar, the algorithm burns $1 of LUNA and mints 1 UST, increasing the UST
supply. In contrast, when the value of 1 UST is lower than $1, the UST is burned, and LUNA is minted to
decrease UST supply.
If demand for UST rises and its price rises above $1 (1UST > $1), LUNA holders can bank a risk-free
profit by swapping $1 of LUNA to create one UST token. Then the returned LUNA is burnt. If demand is
3
low for UST and the price falls below $1 (1UST < $1), UST holders can exchange their UST tokens at a
ratio of 1:1 for LUNA, which is worth more because of their scarcity. Then the returned UST is burnt.
The mechanism requires stable and consistent demand for LUNA and UST.
Terraform Labs, the entity running the Terra project, envisaged its plans for both crypto and real-world
use cases: payment, lending, exchanges, and so on. One example is Anchor, a DeFi lending protocol,
where users can deposit UST and/or borrow UST by pledging LUNA as collateral.
Anchor attracted UST deposits with the promise of 20 percent return and held close to 75 percent of UST
before the fall. These unsustainably high returns were subsidized by the Luna Foundation Guard, which is
an entity backstopping the Terra ecosystem by providing liquidity in case of a market crash, holding
crypto assets—for example, Bitcoin, Avalanche, or others—as reserves.
In the end, the pegging mechanism, as well as interventions by the developers, failed to defend the peg.
As you can see from the right panel of the chart, UST traded at around $0.1–0.2 as of May 18, 2022, and
now UST is not traded in the most major exchanges.
The collapse of UST was triggered by large withdrawals of UST from both crypto exchanges and the
Anchor protocol. It is unclear why and who initiated the withdrawal, but the amount of the withdrawal was
large enough to significantly de-peg the UST from 1 US dollar.
As the large withdrawals occurred, the peg stabilization mechanism kicked in (as intended) by increasing
the supply of LUNA, but it put large downward pressure on LUNA’s price. In turn, the sudden plunge in
LUNA’s value depleted the collateral value in Anchor, triggering the simultaneous liquidation of LUNA.
UST holders, losing confidence in the peg, sold UST in a panic, and a “death spiral” collapsed the Terra
system. Total value locked—that is, the value of user funds deposited in a DeFi protocol—of Anchor and
other DeFi platforms in Terra blockchain dropped in parallel.
Spillovers
The collapse of UST affected not only the Terra ecosystem but also other DeFi platforms and other crypto
assets. In response to the collapse of Terra ecosystem, the Luna Foundation Guard began to release its
reserves to bring UST back to its 1 US dollar peg.
As shown in the left panel, the massive inflow of BTC to the market dragged down Bitcoin prices,
aggravating the sell-off in crypto markets. The incident underscored the market, liquidity, and
concentration risks in the market, dealing a confidence blow to the viability and stability of some crypto
projects.
The failure in the Terra ecosystem caused ripple effects to the entire crypto market and weighed on risk
sentiment. The massive liquidation and withdrawal from Anchor wiped out its liquidity pool almost entirely
in the first three days since the onset of this event.
The right panel shows many of the other DeFi platforms also experienced large withdrawals, as already
noted.
4
Policy recommendations
The interconnectedness among DeFi, stablecoins, and traditional financial institutions is growing. As the
concerns related to crypto assets are increasing, policymakers should be proactive in their actions in
order to prevent negative spillover effects in financial markets.
DeFi poses unique challenges to regulators. It is difficult to regulate anonymous entities without a
centralized governance body. Compounding this, in many countries, the legal environment remains
uncertain as lawmakers have yet to adequate address DeFi in regulatory legislation.
To address legal uncertainties, regulators should prepare regulatory surveillance and globally consistent
regulatory frameworks. As a first step, a more indirect approach would be to address regulatory gaps in
the overall crypto ecosystem. As DeFi has no centralized body, the other centralized entities in the crypto
ecosystem that have enabled the development of DeFi could be the focus of regulation. For example,
stablecoin issuers could be the main regulatory target, given the importance of stablecoins to DeFi.
Discussion is ongoing in international standard-setting bodies—such as the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision, the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, and the International Organization
of Securities Commissions—regarding the regulatory framework on stablecoin issues.
The second step is to regulate key functions within DeFi directly. This approach should take the form of
collaboration between regulators and private sector. Authorities should also encourage DeFi platforms to
adopt robust governance and establish self-regulatory organizations. Transparent and credible
governance structure can be a natural entry point for regulators.
Closing the current regulatory gaps would help to ensure that DeFi risks currently at play are minimized,
while still allowing borrowers to reap the benefits these decentralized financial services have to offer.
5
Previous volumes in this series
1060 The burst of high inflation in 2021–22: How Ricardo Reis
December 2022 and why did we get here?
1059 FX Intervention to Stabilize or Manipulate the Damiano Sandri
December 2022 Exchange Rate? Inference from Profitability
1058 The Lion’s Share: Evidence from Federal Şenay Ağca and Deniz Igan
December 2022 Contracts on the Value of Political
Connections
1057 Macro-financial stability frameworks: Claudio Borio, Ilhyock Shim and
December 2022 experience and challenges Hyun Song Shin
1056 Understanding the food component of Emanuel Kohlscheen
December 2022 inflation
1055 The pandemic, cash and retail payment Raphael Auer, Giulio Cornelli and
December 2022 behaviour: insights from the future of Jon Frost
payments database
1054 Inflation risk and the labor market: beneath Sirio Aramonte
November 2022 the surface of a flat Phillips curve
1053 How abundant are reserves? Evidence from Gara Afonso , Darrell Duffie,
November 2022 the wholesale payment system Lorenzo Rigon and Hyun Song Shin
1052 Systemic risk in markets with multiple central Iñaki Aldasoro and
November 2022 counterparties Luitgard A M Veraart
1051 How capital inflows translate into new bank Carlos Cantú, Catherine Casanova,
November 2022 lending: tracing the mechanism in Latin Rodrigo Alfaro, Fernando
America Chertman, Gerald Cisneros, Toni
dos Santos, Roberto Lobato, Calixto
Lopez, Facundo Luna, David
Moreno, Miguel Sarmiento and
Rafael Nivin
1050 Population aging and bank risk-taking Sebastian Doerr, Gazi Kabaş and
November 2022 Steven Ongena
1049 Crypto trading and Bitcoin prices: evidence Raphael Auer, Giulio Cornelli,
November 2022 from a new database of retail adoption Sebastian Doerr, Jon Frost and
Leonardo Gambacorta
All volumes are available on our website www.bis.org.

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/Emerging_Tech_Bitcoin_Crypto-Done.pdf
Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System
Satoshi Nakamoto
satoshin@gmx.com
www.bitcoin.org
Abstract. A purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash would allow online
payments to be sent directly from one party to another without going through a
financial institution. Digital signatures provide part of the solution, but the main
benefits are lost if a trusted third party is still required to prevent double-spending.
We propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer network.
The network timestamps transactions by hashing them into an ongoing chain of
hash-based proof-of-work, forming a record that cannot be changed without redoing
the proof-of-work. The longest chain not only serves as proof of the sequence of
events witnessed, but proof that it came from the largest pool of CPU power. As
long as a majority of CPU power is controlled by nodes that are not cooperating to
attack the network, they'll generate the longest chain and outpace attackers. The
network itself requires minimal structure. Messages are broadcast on a best effort
basis, and nodes can leave and rejoin the network at will, accepting the longest
proof-of-work chain as proof of what happened while they were gone.
1. Introduction
Commerce on the Internet has come to rely almost exclusively on financial institutions serving as
trusted third parties to process electronic payments. While the system works well enough for
most transactions, it still suffers from the inherent weaknesses of the trust based model.
Completely non-reversible transactions are not really possible, since financial institutions cannot
avoid mediating disputes. The cost of mediation increases transaction costs, limiting the
minimum practical transaction size and cutting off the possibility for small casual transactions,
and there is a broader cost in the loss of ability to make non-reversible payments for non-
reversible services. With the possibility of reversal, the need for trust spreads. Merchants must
be wary of their customers, hassling them for more information than they would otherwise need.
A certain percentage of fraud is accepted as unavoidable. These costs and payment uncertainties
can be avoided in person by using physical currency, but no mechanism exists to make payments
over a communications channel without a trusted party.
What is needed is an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of trust,
allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need for a trusted
third party. Transactions that are computationally impractical to reverse would protect sellers
from fraud, and routine escrow mechanisms could easily be implemented to protect buyers. In
this paper, we propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer distributed
timestamp server to generate computational proof of the chronological order of transactions. The
system is secure as long as honest nodes collectively control more CPU power than any
cooperating group of attacker nodes.
1
2. Transactions
We define an electronic coin as a chain of digital signatures. Each owner transfers the coin to the
next by digitally signing a hash of the previous transaction and the public key of the next owner
and adding these to the end of the coin. A payee can verify the signatures to verify the chain of
ownership.
Transaction Transaction Transaction
Owner 1's Owner 2's Owner 3's
Public Key Public Key Public Key
Hash Hash Hash
Verify Verify
Owner 0's Owner 1's Owner 2's
Signature Signature Signature
Sign Sign
Owner 1's Owner 2's Owner 3's
Private Key Private Key Private Key
The problem of course is the payee can't verify that one of the owners did not double-spend
the coin. A common solution is to introduce a trusted central authority, or mint, that checks every
transaction for double spending. After each transaction, the coin must be returned to the mint to
issue a new coin, and only coins issued directly from the mint are trusted not to be double-spent.
The problem with this solution is that the fate of the entire money system depends on the
company running the mint, with every transaction having to go through them, just like a bank.
We need a way for the payee to know that the previous owners did not sign any earlier
transactions. For our purposes, the earliest transaction is the one that counts, so we don't care
about later attempts to double-spend. The only way to confirm the absence of a transaction is to
be aware of all transactions. In the mint based model, the mint was aware of all transactions and
decided which arrived first. To accomplish this without a trusted party, transactions must be
publicly announced [1], and we need a system for participants to agree on a single history of the
order in which they were received. The payee needs proof that at the time of each transaction, the
majority of nodes agreed it was the first received.
3. Timestamp Server
The solution we propose begins with a timestamp server. A timestamp server works by taking a
hash of a block of items to be timestamped and widely publishing the hash, such as in a
newspaper or Usenet post [2-5]. The timestamp proves that the data must have existed at the
time, obviously, in order to get into the hash. Each timestamp includes the previous timestamp in
its hash, forming a chain, with each additional timestamp reinforcing the ones before it.
Hash Hash
Block Block
Item Item ... Item Item ...
2
4. Proof-of-Work
To implement a distributed timestamp server on a peer-to-peer basis, we will need to use a proof-
of-work system similar to Adam Back's Hashcash [6], rather than newspaper or Usenet posts.
The proof-of-work involves scanning for a value that when hashed, such as with SHA-256, the
hash begins with a number of zero bits. The average work required is exponential in the number
of zero bits required and can be verified by executing a single hash.
For our timestamp network, we implement the proof-of-work by incrementing a nonce in the
block until a value is found that gives the block's hash the required zero bits. Once the CPU
effort has been expended to make it satisfy the proof-of-work, the block cannot be changed
without redoing the work. As later blocks are chained after it, the work to change the block
would include redoing all the blocks after it.
Block Block
Prev Hash Nonce Prev Hash Nonce
Tx Tx ... Tx Tx ...
The proof-of-work also solves the problem of determining representation in majority decision
making. If the majority were based on one-IP-address-one-vote, it could be subverted by anyone
able to allocate many IPs. Proof-of-work is essentially one-CPU-one-vote. The majority
decision is represented by the longest chain, which has the greatest proof-of-work effort invested
in it. If a majority of CPU power is controlled by honest nodes, the honest chain will grow the
fastest and outpace any competing chains. To modify a past block, an attacker would have to
redo the proof-of-work of the block and all blocks after it and then catch up with and surpass the
work of the honest nodes. We will show later that the probability of a slower attacker catching up
diminishes exponentially as subsequent blocks are added.
To compensate for increasing hardware speed and varying interest in running nodes over time,
the proof-of-work difficulty is determined by a moving average targeting an average number of
blocks per hour. If they're generated too fast, the difficulty increases.
5. Network
The steps to run the network are as follows:
1) New transactions are broadcast to all nodes.
2) Each node collects new transactions into a block.
3) Each node works on finding a difficult proof-of-work for its block.
4) When a node finds a proof-of-work, it broadcasts the block to all nodes.
5) Nodes accept the block only if all transactions in it are valid and not already spent.
6) Nodes express their acceptance of the block by working on creating the next block in the
chain, using the hash of the accepted block as the previous hash.
Nodes always consider the longest chain to be the correct one and will keep working on
extending it. If two nodes broadcast different versions of the next block simultaneously, some
nodes may receive one or the other first. In that case, they work on the first one they received,
but save the other branch in case it becomes longer. The tie will be broken when the next proof-
of-work is found and one branch becomes longer; the nodes that were working on the other
branch will then switch to the longer one.
3
New transaction broadcasts do not necessarily need to reach all nodes. As long as they reach
many nodes, they will get into a block before long. Block broadcasts are also tolerant of dropped
messages. If a node does not receive a block, it will request it when it receives the next block and
realizes it missed one.
6. Incentive
By convention, the first transaction in a block is a special transaction that starts a new coin owned
by the creator of the block. This adds an incentive for nodes to support the network, and provides
a way to initially distribute coins into circulation, since there is no central authority to issue them.
The steady addition of a constant of amount of new coins is analogous to gold miners expending
resources to add gold to circulation. In our case, it is CPU time and electricity that is expended.
The incentive can also be funded with transaction fees. If the output value of a transaction is
less than its input value, the difference is a transaction fee that is added to the incentive value of
the block containing the transaction. Once a predetermined number of coins have entered
circulation, the incentive can transition entirely to transaction fees and be completely inflation
free.
The incentive may help encourage nodes to stay honest. If a greedy attacker is able to
assemble more CPU power than all the honest nodes, he would have to choose between using it
to defraud people by stealing back his payments, or using it to generate new coins. He ought to
find it more profitable to play by the rules, such rules that favour him with more new coins than
everyone else combined, than to undermine the system and the validity of his own wealth.
7. Reclaiming Disk Space
Once the latest transaction in a coin is buried under enough blocks, the spent transactions before
it can be discarded to save disk space. To facilitate this without breaking the block's hash,
transactions are hashed in a Merkle Tree [7][2][5], with only the root included in the block's hash.
Old blocks can then be compacted by stubbing off branches of the tree. The interior hashes do
not need to be stored.
Block Block
Block Header (Block Hash) Block Header (Block Hash)
Prev Hash Nonce Prev Hash Nonce
Root Hash Root Hash
Hash01 Hash23 Hash01 Hash23
Hash0 Hash1 Hash2 Hash3 Hash2 Hash3
Tx0 Tx1 Tx2 Tx3 Tx3
Transactions Hashed in a Merkle Tree After Pruning Tx0-2 from the Block
A block header with no transactions would be about 80 bytes. If we suppose blocks are
generated every 10 minutes, 80 bytes * 6 * 24 * 365 = 4.2MB per year. With computer systems
typically selling with 2GB of RAM as of 2008, and Moore's Law predicting current growth of
1.2GB per year, storage should not be a problem even if the block headers must be kept in
memory.
4
8. Simplified Payment Verification
It is possible to verify payments without running a full network node. A user only needs to keep
a copy of the block headers of the longest proof-of-work chain, which he can get by querying
network nodes until he's convinced he has the longest chain, and obtain the Merkle branch
linking the transaction to the block it's timestamped in. He can't check the transaction for
himself, but by linking it to a place in the chain, he can see that a network node has accepted it,
and blocks added after it further confirm the network has accepted it.
Longest Proof-of-Work Chain
Block Header Block Header Block Header
Prev Hash Nonce Prev Hash Nonce Prev Hash Nonce
Merkle Root Merkle Root Merkle Root
Hash01 Hash23
Merkle Branch for Tx3
Hash2 Hash3
Tx3
As such, the verification is reliable as long as honest nodes control the network, but is more
vulnerable if the network is overpowered by an attacker. While network nodes can verify
transactions for themselves, the simplified method can be fooled by an attacker's fabricated
transactions for as long as the attacker can continue to overpower the network. One strategy to
protect against this would be to accept alerts from network nodes when they detect an invalid
block, prompting the user's software to download the full block and alerted transactions to
confirm the inconsistency. Businesses that receive frequent payments will probably still want to
run their own nodes for more independent security and quicker verification.
9. Combining and Splitting Value
Although it would be possible to handle coins individually, it would be unwieldy to make a
separate transaction for every cent in a transfer. To allow value to be split and combined,
transactions contain multiple inputs and outputs. Normally there will be either a single input
from a larger previous transaction or multiple inputs combining smaller amounts, and at most two
outputs: one for the payment, and one returning the change, if any, back to the sender.
Transaction
In Out
In ...
...
It should be noted that fan-out, where a transaction depends on several transactions, and those
transactions depend on many more, is not a problem here. There is never the need to extract a
complete standalone copy of a transaction's history.
5
10. Privacy
The traditional banking model achieves a level of privacy by limiting access to information to the
parties involved and the trusted third party. The necessity to announce all transactions publicly
precludes this method, but privacy can still be maintained by breaking the flow of information in
another place: by keeping public keys anonymous. The public can see that someone is sending
an amount to someone else, but without information linking the transaction to anyone. This is
similar to the level of information released by stock exchanges, where the time and size of
individual trades, the "tape", is made public, but without telling who the parties were.
Traditional Privacy Model
Identities Transactions Trusted Counterparty Public
Third Party
New Privacy Model
Identities Transactions Public
As an additional firewall, a new key pair should be used for each transaction to keep them
from being linked to a common owner. Some linking is still unavoidable with multi-input
transactions, which necessarily reveal that their inputs were owned by the same owner. The risk
is that if the owner of a key is revealed, linking could reveal other transactions that belonged to
the same owner.
11. Calculations
We consider the scenario of an attacker trying to generate an alternate chain faster than the honest
chain. Even if this is accomplished, it does not throw the system open to arbitrary changes, such
as creating value out of thin air or taking money that never belonged to the attacker. Nodes are
not going to accept an invalid transaction as payment, and honest nodes will never accept a block
containing them. An attacker can only try to change one of his own transactions to take back
money he recently spent.
The race between the honest chain and an attacker chain can be characterized as a Binomial
Random Walk. The success event is the honest chain being extended by one block, increasing its
lead by +1, and the failure event is the attacker's chain being extended by one block, reducing the
gap by -1.
The probability of an attacker catching up from a given deficit is analogous to a Gambler's
Ruin problem. Suppose a gambler with unlimited credit starts at a deficit and plays potentially an
infinite number of trials to try to reach breakeven. We can calculate the probability he ever
reaches breakeven, or that an attacker ever catches up with the honest chain, as follows [8]:
p = probability an honest node finds the next block
q = probability the attacker finds the next block
q = probability the attacker will ever catch up from z blocks behind
z
{ 1 if p≤q}
q =
z q/pz if pq
6
Given our assumption that p > q, the probability drops exponentially as the number of blocks the
attacker has to catch up with increases. With the odds against him, if he doesn't make a lucky
lunge forward early on, his chances become vanishingly small as he falls further behind.
We now consider how long the recipient of a new transaction needs to wait before being
sufficiently certain the sender can't change the transaction. We assume the sender is an attacker
who wants to make the recipient believe he paid him for a while, then switch it to pay back to
himself after some time has passed. The receiver will be alerted when that happens, but the
sender hopes it will be too late.
The receiver generates a new key pair and gives the public key to the sender shortly before
signing. This prevents the sender from preparing a chain of blocks ahead of time by working on
it continuously until he is lucky enough to get far enough ahead, then executing the transaction at
that moment. Once the transaction is sent, the dishonest sender starts working in secret on a
parallel chain containing an alternate version of his transaction.
The recipient waits until the transaction has been added to a block and z blocks have been
linked after it. He doesn't know the exact amount of progress the attacker has made, but
assuming the honest blocks took the average expected time per block, the attacker's potential
progress will be a Poisson distribution with expected value:
q
=z
p
To get the probability the attacker could still catch up now, we multiply the Poisson density for
each amount of progress he could have made by the probability he could catch up from that point:
∞ ke− { q/pz−k if k≤z}
∑ ⋅
k! 1 if kz
k=0
Rearranging to avoid summing the infinite tail of the distribution...
z ke−
1−∑  1−q/pz−k
k!
k=0
Converting to C code...
#include <math.h>
double AttackerSuccessProbability(double q, int z)
{
double p = 1.0 - q;
double lambda = z * (q / p);
double sum = 1.0;
int i, k;
for (k = 0; k <= z; k++)
{
double poisson = exp(-lambda);
for (i = 1; i <= k; i++)
poisson *= lambda / i;
sum -= poisson * (1 - pow(q / p, z - k));
}
return sum;
}
7
Running some results, we can see the probability drop off exponentially with z.
q=0.1
z=0 P=1.0000000
z=1 P=0.2045873
z=2 P=0.0509779
z=3 P=0.0131722
z=4 P=0.0034552
z=5 P=0.0009137
z=6 P=0.0002428
z=7 P=0.0000647
z=8 P=0.0000173
z=9 P=0.0000046
z=10 P=0.0000012
q=0.3
z=0 P=1.0000000
z=5 P=0.1773523
z=10 P=0.0416605
z=15 P=0.0101008
z=20 P=0.0024804
z=25 P=0.0006132
z=30 P=0.0001522
z=35 P=0.0000379
z=40 P=0.0000095
z=45 P=0.0000024
z=50 P=0.0000006
Solving for P less than 0.1%...
P < 0.001
q=0.10 z=5
q=0.15 z=8
q=0.20 z=11
q=0.25 z=15
q=0.30 z=24
q=0.35 z=41
q=0.40 z=89
q=0.45 z=340
12. Conclusion
We have proposed a system for electronic transactions without relying on trust. We started with
the usual framework of coins made from digital signatures, which provides strong control of
ownership, but is incomplete without a way to prevent double-spending. To solve this, we
proposed a peer-to-peer network using proof-of-work to record a public history of transactions
that quickly becomes computationally impractical for an attacker to change if honest nodes
control a majority of CPU power. The network is robust in its unstructured simplicity. Nodes
work all at once with little coordination. They do not need to be identified, since messages are
not routed to any particular place and only need to be delivered on a best effort basis. Nodes can
leave and rejoin the network at will, accepting the proof-of-work chain as proof of what
happened while they were gone. They vote with their CPU power, expressing their acceptance of
valid blocks by working on extending them and rejecting invalid blocks by refusing to work on
them. Any needed rules and incentives can be enforced with this consensus mechanism.
8
References
[1] W. Dai, "b-money," http://www.weidai.com/bmoney.txt, 1998.
[2] H. Massias, X.S. Avila, and J.-J. Quisquater, "Design of a secure timestamping service with minimal
trust requirements," In 20th Symposium on Information Theory in the Benelux, May 1999.
[3] S. Haber, W.S. Stornetta, "How to time-stamp a digital document," In Journal of Cryptology, vol 3, no
2, pages 99-111, 1991.
[4] D. Bayer, S. Haber, W.S. Stornetta, "Improving the efficiency and reliability of digital time-stamping,"
In Sequences II: Methods in Communication, Security and Computer Science, pages 329-334, 1993.
[5] S. Haber, W.S. Stornetta, "Secure names for bit-strings," In Proceedings of the 4th ACM Conference
on Computer and Communications Security, pages 28-35, April 1997.
[6] A. Back, "Hashcash - a denial of service counter-measure,"
http://www.hashcash.org/papers/hashcash.pdf, 2002.
[7] R.C. Merkle, "Protocols for public key cryptosystems," In Proc. 1980 Symposium on Security and
Privacy, IEEE Computer Society, pages 122-133, April 1980.
[8] W. Feller, "An introduction to probability theory and its applications," 1957.
9
2018 NATIONAL SEMINAR US SENTENCING COMMISSION
National
Seminar
Genesis Block - The very first block in the Mt. Gox – one of the first Bitcoin Satoshi Nakamoto – the creator of Bitcoin
Bitcoin Glossary: block chain of any digital currency. exchanges that began liquidating after and the author of the original Bitcoin
more than 850,000 of its users’ Bitcoins whitepaper and code. His real identity is
2018 Annual National Seminar Hash - A cryptographic hash is a were lost or stolen – an amount equal to unknown to the world.
mathematical function that takes a file more than $450,000,000 at the time.
and produces a relatively short code that Silk Road – An underground website, as
can be used to identify that file. A hash Output - When a bitcoin transaction takes part of the “dark web”, that was essentially
has a couple of key properties: It is unique. place, the output refers to the destination a black market online. One could
Address - A Bitcoin address is similar to a Bitcoin Whitepaper - Written by Satoshi Cryptocurrency - The broad name for Only a particular file can produce a address used in the transaction. purchase illegal drugs, organs or hire
physical address or an email. It is the only Nakamoto in 2008, it describes the digital currencies that use blockchain particular hash, and two different files assassins online. The site used
information you need to provide for original plan and protocol for Bitcoin. technology to work on a peer-to-peer basis. will never produce the same hash. It Paper Wallet - Some people prefer to store cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and was
someone to pay you with Bitcoin. An Cryptocurrencies don't need a bank to cannot be reversed. You can't work out their bitcoin in the paper wallet – a form of shut down in 2013 by the FBI.
important difference, however, is that each BitPay - BitPay is a payment processing carry out transactions between individuals. what a file was by looking at its hash. cold storage – in order to improve security.
address should only be used for a single company and software that allows The nature of the blockchain means that Hashing is used to prove that a set of data The term simply refers to a printed sheet of SHA-256 - Every digital currency must
transaction. Typically consists of between merchants such as eBay, Amazon and other individuals can transact between each has not been tampered with. It is what paper that holds a number of public bitcoin have a cryptographic function that
26 and 35 alphanumeric characters. online shopping channels to accept bitcoin other, even if they don't trust each other. makes bitcoin mining possible. addresses and corresponding private keys. dictates how the hash is constructed. In
as payment for its goods and services. The cryptocurrency network keeps track of bitcoin, SHA-256 is this function, and is
Altcoin - A form of cryptocurrency that all the transactions and ensures that no one Hash Rate - The hash rate is the P2P - Peer-to-peer refers to systems that used as the basis for hash creation (i.e.
has the same decentralized, peer-to-peer Block - A block is a record in the block tries to renege on a transaction. measuring unit of the processing power of work like an organized collective by bitcoin’s proof of work).
principles as bitcoin, but which uses its chain that contains and confirms many the Bitcoin network. The Bitcoin network allowing each individual to interact
own blockchain and has its own rules of waiting transactions. Roughly every 10 Cryptography - Cryptography is the must make intensive mathematical directly with the others. In the case of Signature - A cryptographic signature is a
operation. Altcoin is the term used to minutes, on average, a new block branch of mathematics that lets us create operations for security purposes. When Bitcoin, the network is built in such a way mathematical mechanism that allows
describe those digital currencies that do including transactions is appended to the mathematical proofs that provide high the network reached a hash rate of 10 that each user is broadcasting the someone to prove ownership. In the case
not have as big a market capitalization or block chain through mining. levels of security. Online commerce and Th/s, it meant it could make 10 trillion transactions of other users. And, crucially, of Bitcoin, a Bitcoin wallet and its private
do not have the recognition of the current banking already uses cryptography. In the calculations per second. no bank is required as a third party. key(s) are linked by some mathematical
incumbent cryptocurrencies such as Block Reward - This term refers to the case of Bitcoin, cryptography is used to magic. When your Bitcoin software signs
bitcoin, litecoin and dogecoin. “reward” that the Miner receives for make it impossible for anybody to spend Microtransaction – The ability to pay for Private Key - A private key is a secret a transaction with the appropriate private
successfully hashing a transaction block. funds from another user's wallet or to things in very small sums thanks to the piece of data that proves your right to key, the whole network can see that the
ASIC - ASIC stands for application corrupt the block chain. It can also be used fact that Bitcoin may be extended to 8 spend bitcoins from a specific wallet signature matches the bitcoins being
specific integrated circuit, which is a Blockchain - A digital file distributed to to encrypt a wallet, so that it cannot be decimal places. Microtransactions are through a cryptographic signature. Your spent. However, there is no way for the
specialized silicon chip that performs just everyone participating in a crypto- used without a password. especially important to Bitcoin casinos by private key(s) are stored in your computer world to guess your private key to steal
one task. In the digital currency space, currency network. The blockchain acts as providing players the ability to deposit and if you use a software wallet; they are your hard-earned bitcoins.
these chips process SHA-256 in order to a kind of general ledger, keeping track of Dogecoin - An altcoin first started as a gamble fractions of Bitcoins. stored on some remote servers if you use a
mine bitcoin and validate transactions. all the transactions that happen in the joke in late 2013. Dogecoin, which web wallet. Private keys must never be Transaction Fee - Some transactions that
network. Everyone can look at the features a Japanese fighting dog as its Mining - The act of producing units of a revealed as they allow you to spend occur in the bitcoin block chain contain
ASIC Miner - An ASIC Miner is the blockchain to see what transactions have mascot, gained a broad international cryptocurrency (such as bitcoins) through bitcoins for their respective Bitcoin wallet. transaction fees. These transaction fees
hardware that houses the chip of the happened on the network, and the following and quickly grew to have a some kind of effort. The effort is required are paid to the miner that hashes the block
same name. You put them into your blockchain is sealed using cryptography multi-million dollar market so that people can't just create infinite Proof of Work [PoW] - Proof of work in question.
Internet connection via a modem or so that no one can tamper with it. capitalization. amounts of the digital currency, which simply refers to the output of any efforts to
wireless mode. Bitcoin is independent of would devalue it. In bitcoin, mining mine bitcoin. In the bitcoin block chain, the Wallet - A Bitcoin wallet is loosely the
your desktop computer. Cold Storage – A security measure for Double Spend - If a malicious user tries to requires computing power. Here is a hashing of a block takes time and effort, equivalent of a physical wallet on the
Bitcoin that is disconnected from the spend their bitcoins with two different detailed description of how mining works. meaning the hash block can be considered Bitcoin network. The wallet actually
Bit - Bit is a common unit used to internet. Could be a paper wallet [see recipients at the same time, this is double Bitcoin mining is the process of making proof of work. contains your private key(s) which allow
designate a sub-unit of a bitcoin - 1,000,000 below], USB stick or hardware wallet. spending. Bitcoin mining and the block computer hardware do mathematical you to spend the bitcoins allocated to it in
bits is equal to 1 bitcoin (BTC or ). This chain are there to create a consensus on calculations for the Bitcoin network to Public key - The public key is a string of the block chain. Each Bitcoin wallet can
unit is usually more convenient for pricing, Confirmation - Confirmation means that the network about which of the two confirm transactions and increase security. digits and letters (your bitcoin address). show you the total balance of all bitcoins it
tips, goods and services. a transaction has been processed by the transactions will confirm and be As a reward for their services, Bitcoin When hashed with a corresponding string controls and lets you pay a specific
network and is highly unlikely to be considered valid. miners can collect transaction fees for the known as a private key it digitally signs amount to a specific person, just like a real
Bitcoin / BTC (shorthand) - A form of reversed. Transactions receive a transactions they confirm, along with and online communication. wallet. This is different from credit cards
digital currency created in 2009, that is confirmation when they are included in a Exchange - An exchange is exactly how it newly created bitcoins. Mining is a where you are charged by the merchant.
created and distributed on a peer-to-peer block and for each subsequent block. Even a sounds, somewhere where account holders specialized and competitive market where Satoshi – A Bitcoin “cent”, the smallest
basis. It has no central bank - transactions single confirmation can be considered can exchange one digital currency for another the rewards are divided up according to form of Bitcoins. One Bitcoin is equal to 1
are conducted directly between secure for low value transactions, although or a Fiat currency for a digital currency. how much calculation is done. Not all million Satoshis.
individuals. Bitcoin is the most popular for larger amounts like $1,000 US, it makes Bitcoin users do Bitcoin mining, and it is
kind of cryptocurrency. sense to wait for 6 confirmations or more. Faucet - When an individual or team of not an easy way to make money.
Each confirmation exponentially decreases individuals develop a digital currency,
Bitcoin Index - The live bitcoin news the risk of a reversed transaction. they may pre-mine a certain amount
bitcoin index is a weighted average index before release and give these pre-mined
that shows the value of one bitcoin versus coins away. This is called a faucet.
one single unit of currency of each of the
majors in the Forex space – EUR, USD, FIAT - A Fiat currency is a traditional
JPY, GBP and AUD. paperback currency that is regulated by an
organization such as the central bank.
Examples include the Euro, the US dollar
and the Australian dollar.
2018 NATIONAL SEMINAR US SENTENCING COMMISSION
Bitcoin Glossary:
National
Seminar
2018 Annual National Seminar
Genesis Block - The very first block in the Mt. Gox – one of the first Bitcoin Satoshi Nakamoto – the creator of Bitcoin
block chain of any digital currency. exchanges that began liquidating after and the author of the original Bitcoin
more than 850,000 of its users’ Bitcoins whitepaper and code. His real identity is
Hash - A cryptographic hash is a were lost or stolen – an amount equal to unknown to the world.
mathematical function that takes a file more than $450,000,000 at the time.
and produces a relatively short code that Silk Road – An underground website, as
can be used to identify that file. A hash Output - When a bitcoin transaction takes part of the “dark web”, that was essentially
has a couple of key properties: It is unique. place, the output refers to the destination a black market online. One could
Address - A Bitcoin address is similar to a Bitcoin Whitepaper - Written by Satoshi Cryptocurrency - The broad name for Only a particular file can produce a address used in the transaction. purchase illegal drugs, organs or hire
physical address or an email. It is the only Nakamoto in 2008, it describes the digital currencies that use blockchain particular hash, and two different files assassins online. The site used
information you need to provide for original plan and protocol for Bitcoin. technology to work on a peer-to-peer basis. will never produce the same hash. It Paper Wallet - Some people prefer to store cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and was
someone to pay you with Bitcoin. An Cryptocurrencies don't need a bank to cannot be reversed. You can't work out their bitcoin in the paper wallet – a form of shut down in 2013 by the FBI.
important difference, however, is that each BitPay - BitPay is a payment processing carry out transactions between individuals. what a file was by looking at its hash. cold storage – in order to improve security.
address should only be used for a single company and software that allows The nature of the blockchain means that Hashing is used to prove that a set of data The term simply refers to a printed sheet of SHA-256 - Every digital currency must
transaction. Typically consists of between merchants such as eBay, Amazon and other individuals can transact between each has not been tampered with. It is what paper that holds a number of public bitcoin have a cryptographic function that
26 and 35 alphanumeric characters. online shopping channels to accept bitcoin other, even if they don't trust each other. makes bitcoin mining possible. addresses and corresponding private keys. dictates how the hash is constructed. In
as payment for its goods and services. The cryptocurrency network keeps track of bitcoin, SHA-256 is this function, and is
Altcoin - A form of cryptocurrency that all the transactions and ensures that no one Hash Rate - The hash rate is the P2P - Peer-to-peer refers to systems that used as the basis for hash creation (i.e.
has the same decentralized, peer-to-peer Block - A block is a record in the block tries to renege on a transaction. measuring unit of the processing power of work like an organized collective by bitcoin’s proof of work).
principles as bitcoin, but which uses its chain that contains and confirms many the Bitcoin network. The Bitcoin network allowing each individual to interact
own blockchain and has its own rules of waiting transactions. Roughly every 10 Cryptography - Cryptography is the must make intensive mathematical directly with the others. In the case of Signature - A cryptographic signature is a
operation. Altcoin is the term used to minutes, on average, a new block branch of mathematics that lets us create operations for security purposes. When Bitcoin, the network is built in such a way mathematical mechanism that allows
describe those digital currencies that do including transactions is appended to the mathematical proofs that provide high the network reached a hash rate of 10 that each user is broadcasting the someone to prove ownership. In the case
not have as big a market capitalization or block chain through mining. levels of security. Online commerce and Th/s, it meant it could make 10 trillion transactions of other users. And, crucially, of Bitcoin, a Bitcoin wallet and its private
do not have the recognition of the current banking already uses cryptography. In the calculations per second. no bank is required as a third party. key(s) are linked by some mathematical
incumbent cryptocurrencies such as Block Reward - This term refers to the case of Bitcoin, cryptography is used to magic. When your Bitcoin software signs
bitcoin, litecoin and dogecoin. “reward” that the Miner receives for make it impossible for anybody to spend Microtransaction – The ability to pay for Private Key - A private key is a secret a transaction with the appropriate private
successfully hashing a transaction block. funds from another user's wallet or to things in very small sums thanks to the piece of data that proves your right to key, the whole network can see that the
ASIC - ASIC stands for application corrupt the block chain. It can also be used fact that Bitcoin may be extended to 8 spend bitcoins from a specific wallet signature matches the bitcoins being
specific integrated circuit, which is a Blockchain - A digital file distributed to to encrypt a wallet, so that it cannot be decimal places. Microtransactions are through a cryptographic signature. Your spent. However, there is no way for the
specialized silicon chip that performs just everyone participating in a crypto- used without a password. especially important to Bitcoin casinos by private key(s) are stored in your computer world to guess your private key to steal
one task. In the digital currency space, currency network. The blockchain acts as providing players the ability to deposit and if you use a software wallet; they are your hard-earned bitcoins.
these chips process SHA-256 in order to a kind of general ledger, keeping track of Dogecoin - An altcoin first started as a gamble fractions of Bitcoins. stored on some remote servers if you use a
mine bitcoin and validate transactions. all the transactions that happen in the joke in late 2013. Dogecoin, which web wallet. Private keys must never be Transaction Fee - Some transactions that
network. Everyone can look at the features a Japanese fighting dog as its Mining - The act of producing units of a revealed as they allow you to spend occur in the bitcoin block chain contain
ASIC Miner - An ASIC Miner is the blockchain to see what transactions have mascot, gained a broad international cryptocurrency (such as bitcoins) through bitcoins for their respective Bitcoin wallet. transaction fees. These transaction fees
hardware that houses the chip of the happened on the network, and the following and quickly grew to have a some kind of effort. The effort is required are paid to the miner that hashes the block
same name. You put them into your blockchain is sealed using cryptography multi-million dollar market so that people can't just create infinite Proof of Work [PoW] - Proof of work in question.
Internet connection via a modem or so that no one can tamper with it. capitalization. amounts of the digital currency, which simply refers to the output of any efforts to
wireless mode. Bitcoin is independent of would devalue it. In bitcoin, mining mine bitcoin. In the bitcoin block chain, the Wallet - A Bitcoin wallet is loosely the
your desktop computer. Cold Storage – A security measure for Double Spend - If a malicious user tries to requires computing power. Here is a hashing of a block takes time and effort, equivalent of a physical wallet on the
Bitcoin that is disconnected from the spend their bitcoins with two different detailed description of how mining works. meaning the hash block can be considered Bitcoin network. The wallet actually
Bit - Bit is a common unit used to internet. Could be a paper wallet [see recipients at the same time, this is double Bitcoin mining is the process of making proof of work. contains your private key(s) which allow
designate a sub-unit of a bitcoin - 1,000,000 below], USB stick or hardware wallet. spending. Bitcoin mining and the block computer hardware do mathematical you to spend the bitcoins allocated to it in
bits is equal to 1 bitcoin (BTC or ). This chain are there to create a consensus on calculations for the Bitcoin network to Public key - The public key is a string of the block chain. Each Bitcoin wallet can
unit is usually more convenient for pricing, Confirmation - Confirmation means that the network about which of the two confirm transactions and increase security. digits and letters (your bitcoin address). show you the total balance of all bitcoins it
tips, goods and services. a transaction has been processed by the transactions will confirm and be As a reward for their services, Bitcoin When hashed with a corresponding string controls and lets you pay a specific
network and is highly unlikely to be considered valid. miners can collect transaction fees for the known as a private key it digitally signs amount to a specific person, just like a real
Bitcoin / BTC (shorthand) - A form of reversed. Transactions receive a transactions they confirm, along with and online communication. wallet. This is different from credit cards
digital currency created in 2009, that is confirmation when they are included in a Exchange - An exchange is exactly how it newly created bitcoins. Mining is a where you are charged by the merchant.
created and distributed on a peer-to-peer block and for each subsequent block. Even a sounds, somewhere where account holders specialized and competitive market where Satoshi – A Bitcoin “cent”, the smallest
basis. It has no central bank - transactions single confirmation can be considered can exchange one digital currency for another the rewards are divided up according to form of Bitcoins. One Bitcoin is equal to 1
are conducted directly between secure for low value transactions, although or a Fiat currency for a digital currency. how much calculation is done. Not all million Satoshis.
individuals. Bitcoin is the most popular for larger amounts like $1,000 US, it makes Bitcoin users do Bitcoin mining, and it is
kind of cryptocurrency. sense to wait for 6 confirmations or more. Faucet - When an individual or team of not an easy way to make money. *This glossary contains terminology and explanations of concepts relevant to various emerging
Each confirmation exponentially decreases individuals develop a digital currency, technologies. The purpose of the glossary is to inform the reader of the most commonly used vocabulary
Bitcoin Index - The live bitcoin news the risk of a reversed transaction. they may pre-mine a certain amount terms in the cyber world. This glossary was compiled from various sources readily available on the Internet.
bitcoin index is a weighted average index before release and give these pre-mined
that shows the value of one bitcoin versus coins away. This is called a faucet.
one single unit of currency of each of the
majors in the Forex space – EUR, USD, FIAT - A Fiat currency is a traditional The United States Sentencing Commission, an independent
JPY, GBP and AUD. paperback currency that is regulated by an To receive updates on future events and other Commission agency in the judicial branch of the federal government,
organization such as the central bank. activities, visit us on Twitter @TheUSSCgov, or subscribe to was organized in 1985 to develop a national sentencing
Examples include the Euro, the US dollar e-mail updates through our website at www.ussc.gov. For gp uo il dic ey l info er s t ph re o vf ie dd ee r sa trl uc co tuu rr et s. f oT rh e th ere s cu ol uti rn tg s’ s se en nt te en nc ci in ng g
guidelines questions, call our Helpline at 202.502.4545, and
and the Australian dollar. discretion to help ensure that similar offenders who commit
to request training, email us at training@ussc.gov. similar offenses receive similar sentences.

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/5-A Beginners Guide to Cryptocurrencies_ Explaining the Technologi-done.pdf
UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff RRiicchhmmoonndd
UURR SScchhoollaarrsshhiipp RReeppoossiittoorryy
Law Student Publications School of Law
2023
AA BBeeggiinnnneerr''ss GGuuiiddee ttoo CCrryyppttooccuurrrreenncciieess:: EExxppllaaiinniinngg tthhee
TTeecchhnnoollooggiieess BBeehhiinndd CCrryyppttooccuurrrreenncciieess,, HHooww tthhee UUnniitteedd SSttaatteess
TTaaxxeess aanndd RReegguullaatteess TThheemm,, aanndd OOffffeerriinngg CChhaannggeess ttoo tthhee EExxiissttiinngg
TTaaxxaattiioonn aanndd RReegguullaattiioonn SScchheemmeess
J. Merritt Francis
University of Richmond School of Law
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarship.richmond.edu/law-student-publications
Part of the Science and Technology Law Commons, Securities Law Commons, and the Tax Law
Commons
RReeccoommmmeennddeedd CCiittaattiioonn
J. Merritt Francis, A Beginner’s Guide to Cryptocurrencies: Explaining the Technologies Behind
Cryptocurrencies, How the United States Taxes and Regulates Them, and Offering Changes to the Existing
Taxation and Regulation Schemes, 30 RICH. J.L. & TECH. 45 (2023).
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the School of Law at UR Scholarship Repository. It has
been accepted for inclusion in Law Student Publications by an authorized administrator of UR Scholarship
Repository. For more information, please contact scholarshiprepository@richmond.edu.
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO CRYPTOCURRENCIES: EXPLAINING
THE TECHNOLOGIES BEHIND CRYPTOCURRENCIES, HOW THE
UNITED STATES TAXES AND REGULATES THEM, AND
OFFERING CHANGES TO THE EXISTING TAXATION AND
REGULATION SCHEMES
J. Merritt Francis*
Cite as: J. Merritt Francis, A Beginner’s Guide to Cryptocurrencies:
Explaining the Technologies Behind Cryptocurrencies, How the United
States Taxes and Regulates Them, and Offering Changes to the Existing
Taxation and Regulation Schemes, 30 RICH. J.L. & TECH. 45 (2023).
* LL.M. in Taxation Candidate, 2024, New York University School of Law; J.D., 2023,
University of Richmond School of Law; B.S., 2018, University of South Carolina. I
would like to thank Professor Christopher A. Cotropia, whose guidance and assistance
yielded the analyses’ depth and clarity throughout the challenging topics addressed. I
would also like to thank Payton A. Miles, Paige R. Skinner, Joseph R. Patrell, and the rest
of the Richmond Journal of Law & Technology for their steadfast efforts in bringing this
article to publication.
45
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
ABSTRACT
The United States federal government has attempted to use its existing
regulatory and taxation schemes to regulate and tax cryptocurrencies, while
many individuals are still unsure as to what cryptocurrency really is. The
Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodities Future Trading
Commission have both asserted their jurisdiction over cryptocurrency,
resulting in unclear guidance for developers in the cryptocurrency space and
a failure to adequately protect investors. Further, the Internal Revenue
Service taxes cryptocurrency like a security rather than a currency, which
disincentivizes adopting cryptocurrency as a form of payment.
Nevertheless, although cryptocurrencies are taxed like securities, there are
tax breaks for securities and commodities activities that are not currently
available for cryptocurrency activities. Under the United States’ current
approach, investors will remain vulnerable to fraud, and businesses and
individuals using cryptocurrencies for goods and services will be subject to
an extra level of taxation.
This paper’s initial purpose is to provide readers with sufficient background
knowledge on the architecture underlying a blockchain network. The paper
then endorses creating a joint self-regulatory organization and providing the
organization with original jurisdiction over all cryptocurrency activities to
provide uniform registration and reporting requirements. Further, the paper
offers suggestions on how the United States can change its approach to
taxing cryptocurrencies, so they are treated more like currencies when used
for goods or services, and treated more like securities when the taxpayer is
an active trader or participant node on the blockchain network.
46
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
I. INTRODUCTION
[1] Whether you saw a crypto.com commercial with Matt Damon or
heard about the FTX bankruptcy, you have likely heard about
cryptocurrency. Even though most people have heard about cryptocurrency,
there seems to be a general lack of understanding about what cryptocurrency
really is. This lack of understanding cryptocurrency is common in all stages
of life, from middle schoolers to senior citizens, and is common amongst all
walks of life, from teachers to attorneys and congresspeople. Some
members of Congress do not understand the first thing about
cryptocurrency, while others actively trade cryptocurrency.1
[2] The technology underlying cryptocurrency, blockchain technology,
is complicated on its own. People are reluctant to allocate their time and
energy to learn about digital currencies when they have paper dollars in their
pockets and bank accounts that work just fine. Beyond the complex
technology underlying crypto, some people fail to understand its
macroeconomics and potential efficacy on a global scale.2 Nonetheless,
with so much institutional money in the cryptocurrency market and the
potential applications of cryptocurrency, it is not going anywhere anytime
soon.
1 See generally Stacy Elliot, Members of Congress Who Have Traded Crypto Since 2020,
DECRYPT (June 11, 2022), https://decrypt.co/102614/members-of-congress-traded-
bitcoin-ethereum-coinbase-even-dogecoin-since-2020 [https://perma.cc/VCG8-MSYN]
(discussing a partisan split for cryptocurrency).
2 See How Can Cryptocurrency Reshape the Global Economy?, INT’L FIN. (Mar. 21,
2022), https://internationalfinance.com/how-cryptocurrency-reshape-global-economy/
[https://perma.cc/2XV3-YMRX].
47
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[3] The cryptocurrency market cap went from $0 in 2011 to about $3
trillion in November 2021.3 The crypto market cap then lost over $2 trillion
in the last year due to scandals and hacks, among other things, and the
crypto market cap currently sits at about $1.26 trillion at the time of this
writing.4 United States federal agencies and officials have responded slowly
in regulating the new technology since the market’s inception, taking a
“regulation through litigation,” ad hoc approach.5 Some investors have
made more money than they could have imagined from crypto, while others
have taken unfathomable losses. Either way, the United States government
has been there to prosecute wrongdoers and tax the fortunes earned along
the way.6 The United States’ ad hoc approach has been effective in
prosecuting fraudsters, but it has failed in providing clear guidance to
developers in the space and protecting investors before their injuries occur.
Most people purchasing cryptocurrencies have hopes of earning profit, but
it is unclear whether they are purchasing a commodity, a security, or
something entirely different. With the recent FTX bankruptcy, investors and
policymakers are calling for clear regulation in the crypto industry more
loudly than ever before.7
3 Overall cryptocurrency market capitalization per week from July 2010 to September
2023, STATISTA, https://www.statista.com/statistics/730876/cryptocurrency-maket-value/
[https://perma.cc/9NA7-NZJF].
4 Id.
5 See SEC Crypto Enforcement Actions on Track to Outpace 2022, PYMNTS (May 5,
2023), https://www.pymnts.com/cryptocurrency/2023/sec-crypto-enforcement-actions-
could-outpace-2022/ [https://perma.cc/5GJB-EUTB].
6 See id.
7 Erin Griffith, Why the Crypto Collapse Matters, N.Y. TIMES (Nov. 17, 2022),
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/11/17/briefing/crypto-collapse-ftx.html
[https://perma.cc/ET4E-3ZM2]; see also Erin E. Broderick et al., FTX Files for Chapter
11 Bankruptcy, EVERSHEDS SUTHERLAND (Nov. 30, 2022), https://us.eversheds-
sutherland.com/mobile/NewsCommentary/Legal-Alerts/254934/FTX-files-for-Chapter-
11-bankruptcy [https://perma.cc/BLC5-UU77].
48
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[4] This paper attempts to serve three purposes: (1) to explain
cryptocurrency and its underlying technologies to the common person; (2)
to illustrate the United States’ current regulatory and taxation schemes; and
(3) to offer a regulatory and taxation framework that provides a consumer-
safe environment and promotes the new technology’s growth in the United
States. Section II explains cryptocurrency, blockchain technology, and
cryptocurrency exchanges and wallets. Section III examines the United
States federal government’s approach to regulating cryptocurrency. Section
IV details the United States federal government’s approach to taxing
cryptocurrencies. Section V offers regulatory and taxation schemes the
United States could adopt for cryptocurrencies. Section VI concludes the
paper and gives highlights of the main issues discussed.
II. CRYPTO & BLOCKCHAIN EXPLAINED
[5] Cryptocurrency refers to a digital asset that uses distributed ledger
technology, also known as blockchain technology, to enable and process
transactions.8 The term “cryptocurrency” is used because this digital
currency uses cryptographic protocols to secure transactions.9 This section
explains why cryptocurrency was invented in the first place, details the
technologies and architectures underlying cryptocurrencies, and provides
stories and examples of success and loss in the cryptocurrency market.
Although there were cryptocurrencies created as early as the 1990s,10
8 See Digital Assets, Distributed Ledger Technology and the Future of Capital Markets,
WORLD ECON. F. (May 6, 2021), https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Digital_Assets_
Distributed_Ledger_Technology_2021.pdf [https://perma.cc/D3BZ-B45R] [hereinafter
Digital Assets].
9 See id.
10 See Nathan Reiff, What Was the First Cryptocurrency?, INVESTOPEDIA,
https://www.investopedia.com/tech/were-there-cryptocurrencies-bitcoin/
[https://perma.cc/FV6Y-JZLM] (last updated July 23, 2022).
49
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
Bitcoin’s origin story illustrates why this industry came to fruition and helps
explain how cryptocurrencies function.
A. Bitcoin Origin Story
[6] In 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto published a paper titled, “Bitcoin: A
Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.”11 Satoshi begins the paper by noting
how internet commerce relies “almost exclusively on financial institutions
serving as trusted third parties to process electronic payments[,]” and points
out several flaws with this trust-based, third party model.12 First,
transactions processed by a trusted third-party are reversible. For example,
if a bank’s customer disputes a charge posted to their bank account, the bank
might cancel the transaction. When a disagreement over a transaction arises
between two parties, the trusted third parties (credit card companies, banks,
Paypal, etc.) are forced to mediate the dispute.13 It costs money to mediate
these disputes, thereby increasing transaction costs and leading to the
second problem: very small transactions (e.g., paying ten cents to read an
article or watch a short video) are impractical because the transaction costs
involved are too high.14 Lastly, credit card companies can cancel
transactions even though some services are nonreversible (e.g., renting and
watching a movie online), and no third-party should be able to reverse these
transactions. “With the possibility of reversal, the need for trust spreads[,]”
11 Satoshi Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, BITCOIN, 1 (Oct.
31, 2008), https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf [https://perma.cc/6DYN-7CHM].
12 Id.
13 Raphael Meyer, The Bitcoin whitepaper, explained and commented – section 1,
introduction, MEDIUM (Mar. 22, 2020), https://meyer-raph.medium.com/the-bitcoin-
whitepaper-explained-and-commented-section-1-introduction-55f23e96a110
[https://perma.cc/V6NG-K5FD].
14 Nakamoto, supra note 11.
50
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
and merchants are forced to hassle customers for personal information when
they only need payment for the goods and services.15
[7] To resolve these issues, Satoshi proposed an electronic payment
system where any two parties can transact directly with each other without
the need for a trusted third party.16 In theory, without the need for a trusted
third party to validate and process transactions, transaction costs would be
low, no third parties could reverse transactions, and merchants could only
require payment rather than personal information from their customers.17
Put differently, Bitcoin was designed to be a cash-like payment system that
permits electronic transactions but also includes the advantages of physical
currencies.18 There are three main concepts to understand how Bitcoin and
other cryptocurrencies work: blockchain technology, nodes on a peer-to-
peer network, and consensus algorithms.
B. Blockchain Technology Explained
[8] Blockchain technology refers to a distributed, decentralized
database that keeps records of transactions.19 Blockchains are distributed
because transactions are viewable by the public; you can go online and view
all transactions on the Bitcoin blockchain.20 Blockchains are decentralized
because there is no central authority, such as a bank, to validate and verify
15 Id.
16 Id.
17 Meyer, supra note 13.
18 See Nakamoto, supra note 11.
19 See Digital Assets, supra note 8.
20 See, e.g., Blockchain Explorer – Bitcoin Tracker & More, BLOCKCHAIN.COM, https://
www.blockchain.com/explorer [https://perma.cc/7R73-AFXF] (last visited Oct. 1, 2023).
51
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
transactions.21 Transactions are validated and processed by a peer-to-peer
network of computers called nodes.22 It may be helpful to think of
blockchains like a bank ledger, but instead of an individual working at a
bank processing and recording transactions, computers around the world do
all the work. Blockchains are more than a way to process and validate
transactions; blockchains are also a registry and inventory for all assets on
the blockchain.23
[9] The second element essential to understanding cryptocurrency and
blockchain technology is the concept of nodes working together on a peer-
to-peer network. In this context, nodes are computers located around the
world owned by businesses and individuals that are running the respective
blockchain’s software.24 The nodes operating on the peer-to-peer network
give blockchains their decentralized feature because there is no single
computer storing and recording transactions—unlike a bank.25 The nodes
all work together to confirm the history of all transactions on the blockchain
and prevent the “double-spending” problem.26 The double-spending
problem is when an individual attempts to make a transaction and they lack
sufficient funds, similar to an individual using a check to purchase goods
when they do not have the money in their account to cover the check’s
promised amount.27 The nodes effectively communicate together to say,
21 See Digital Assets, supra note 8.
22 Id. at 17.
23 See Deen Newman, Blockchain Node Providers and How They Work, INFOQ (Mar. 3,
2021), https://www.infoq.com/articles/blockchain-as-a-service-get-block/
[https://perma.cc/LE9H-MLPH].
24 Id.
25 See id.
26 Nakamoto, supra note 11, at 8.
27 Meyer, supra note 13.
52
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
“yes, this wallet contains five Bitcoins, and this user has four Bitcoins to
send.”
[10] To send a transaction on the Bitcoin blockchain, an individual must
log into their wallet with a password, input the Bitcoin amount and
recipient, then input another password to confirm the transaction.28 When
the Bitcoin network processes the transaction, the transaction data is
bundled together with the data of 2,000 other transactions, on average.29
When a Bitcoin block reaches its data storage capacity (approximately
2,000 transactions), the block of data is added onto the chain, thereby
creating the blockchain.30 The nodes receive an updated list of all
transactions on the blockchain, which preserves the history of all
transactions on the blockchain.31 The following picture demonstrates how
transactions are processed, validated, and recorded by nodes on a
blockchain’s peer-to-peer network:
28 Adekola Olawale, Bitcoin Security: Insights into how to secure BTC tokens in storage,
MEDIUM (Mar. 16, 2023), https://medium.com/@Adekola_Olawale/bitcoin-security-
f92ed0ccaa64 [https://perma.cc/HMF6-6X6Q].
29 See Bitcoin Average Transactions Per Block (I:BATPB), YCHARTS,
https://ycharts.com/indicators/bitcoin_average_transactions_per_block
[https://perma.cc/X237-6MQG] (last visited Oct. 1, 2023).
30 See generally Xenia Soares, How Blocks Are Added to a Blockchain, Explained Simply,
COINDESK, https://www.coindesk.com/learn/how-blocks-are-added-to-a-blockchain-
explained-simply/ [https://perma.cc/HCG7-A2XM] (last updated May 11, 2023, 12:52
PM) (explaining how blocks of information are linked on a virtual chain).
31 See id.
53
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
32
[11] For a node to approve a transaction, the node must satisfy the
blockchain’s respective consensus algorithm.33
C. How Nodes Approve Transactions: Consensus Algorithms
[12] A consensus algorithm is a core part of any blockchain network.34 It
is the procedure through which all of the participant nodes on a blockchain
network reach a common agreement about the present state of the
32 Hong-Ning Dai et al., Blockchain for Internet of Things: A Survey, RESEARCHGATE
(June 2019), https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333600905_Blockchain_for_
Internet_of_Things_A_Survey [https://perma.cc/3XMH-RWVQ].
33 Chizurum Ibeawuchi, What is a consensus algorithm?, EDUCATIVE, https://www.
educative.io/answers/what-is-a-consensus-algorithm [https://perma.cc/XN6C-5FUE] (last
visited Oct. 6, 2023).
34 Id.
54
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
distributed ledger.35 Consensus algorithms force the nodes to work together
to achieve reliability in a blockchain, thereby eliminating the double-
spending problem.36 When a node satisfies a blockchain’s consensus
algorithm, the blockchain transaction is processed and added to the
blockchain’s history, and the node is rewarded with cryptocurrency.37 There
are two types of consensus algorithms this paper will cover: Proof of Work
and Proof of Stake.
1. Proof of Work Consensus Algorithms
[13] On blockchains using Proof of Work (PoW) consensus algorithms,
the participant nodes on the peer-to-peer network, referred to as crypto
miners, download the blockchain’s entire transaction history.38 When a
transaction is sent on the blockchain, the nodes run the full blockchain
transaction history through a complex mathematical function called a
“hash” puzzle.39 When a node solves a hash puzzle, the transaction is added
to the blockchain, and the node is rewarded by being selected to mine a
block, which is the privilege of adding a valid block onto the blockchain.40
35 See id.
36 See id.
37 See Consensus Algorithms: Securing Blockchain Transactions, MEDIUM (Sept. 21,
2018), https://medium.com/coinbundle/consensus-algorithms-dfa4f355259d
[https://perma.cc/ZUQ6-G9QE].
38 See Ibeawuchi, supra note 33; see E. Napoletano, Proof of Work Explained, FORBES,
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/cryptocurrency/proof-of-work
[https://perma.cc/5DQN-C63J] (last updated Aug. 25, 2023, 1:26 PM); What is a Bitcoin
Node? A beginner’s guide on blockchain nodes, COINTELEGRAPH, https://cointelegraph.
com/learn/what-is-a-bitcoin-node-a-beginners-guide-on-blockchain-nodes
[https://perma.cc/P7ZR-FVBE] (last visited Nov. 28, 2023).
39 See Ibeawuchi, supra note 33; see Napoletano, supra note 38.
40 Napoletano, supra note 38.
55
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
The node earns cryptocurrency as mining rewards for helping run the
blockchain network, which is why PoW blockchain nodes are called “crypto
miners”.41
[14] The Bitcoin blockchain is an example of a blockchain employing a
PoW consensus algorithm with hash puzzles. When an individual sends
Bitcoin to someone, nodes around the world race to solve the hash puzzle,
the answer to which is called a hash.42 For example, the hash
for Bitcoin block #660000 is 00000000000000000008eddcaf078f12c69a4
39dde30dbb5aac3d9d94e9c18f6.43 When the crypto miner’s node solved
the hash for Bitcoin block #660000, the Bitcoin transactions were added to
the ledger and the node received 6.25 Bitcoin,44 which was worth
approximately $117,370 at the time.45 The crypto miner of Bitcoin block
#660000 could sell or hold the Bitcoin it earned after running their node on
the Bitcoin network, thereby helping the network operate.46 The most
successful cryptocurrency miners on a PoW blockchain solve hash puzzles
more quickly than other miners, which requires an immense amount of
computing power.47
41 See id.
42 See id.
43 Bitcoin Block 660,000, BLOCKCHAIN.COM, https://www.blockchain.com/explorer/
blocks/btc/660000 [https://perma.cc/ZA4A-2ZWM] (last visited Nov. 8, 2023).
44 Id.
45 Id.
46 See Napoletano, supra note 38.
47 See Leigh Cuen, The debate about cryptocurrency and energy consumption,
TECHCRUNCH (Mar. 21, 2021, 11:30 AM), https://techcrunch.com/2021/03/21/the-
debate-about-cryptocurrency-and-energy-consumption/ [https://perma.cc/GU7P-NN54].
56
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[15] One of blockchain’s most redeeming qualities is that it is immutable;
once a transaction processes on a blockchain, it’s practically irreversible,
just as Satoshi intended.48 The nodes work together to maintain an updated
record of all the transactions on the blockchain, thereby maintaining
consensus and integrity in the network’s transaction history.49 PoW
consensus algorithms make it almost impossible to alter any aspect of the
blockchain because it requires an impracticable amount of computing
power to rewrite the blockchain’s history.50 To illustrate: consider a bad
actor who seeks to infiltrate the Bitcoin blockchain and rewrite the
blockchain’s transaction history to give themself all the Bitcoin. The hacker
would need a computer powerful enough to overpower at least half the
nodes on the Bitcoin network.51 If the hacker could overpower at least half
the nodes on the Bitcoin network, then the hacker could rewrite the Bitcoin
transaction history to make themself own all the Bitcoin, a majority of nodes
on the network (all in control of the hacker) would come into consensus
with each other, and the minority of other nodes (not in control of the
hacker) would follow suit. Overpowering half the nodes on the Bitcoin
network, however, would require approximately 317 million to 1.9 billion
48 Mayank Sahu, What Makes a Blockchain Network Immutable? Immutability Explained,
UPGRAD, https://www.upgrad.com/blog/what-makes-a-blockchain-network-immutable/
[https://perma.cc/BP74-4ZX6] (last updated Nov. 22, 2022); Nakamoto, supra note 11.
49Ayushi Abrol, What Are Blockchain Nodes? Detailed Guide, BLOCKCHAIN COUNCIL
(Sept. 27, 2023), https://www.blockchain-council.org/blockchain/blockchain-nodes/
[https://perma.cc/2VEV-UKZJ].
50 Joey Prebys, Can bitcoin be hacked?, OLLIV (June 22, 2021), https://www.olliv.com/
en-US/intro-to-crypto/safety-security/can-bitcoin-be-hacked [https://perma.cc/4H5V-
MHW6].
51 Id.
57
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
qubits of computing power,52 while IBM’s record-breaking quantum
computer has only 127 qubits of computing power.53 Thus, the hacker’s
computer would have to be (at least) approximately 2.5 million times more
powerful than the current world’s best computer. Bitcoin’s immutability is
one of the reasons it has a market cap of over half a trillion dollars: investors
trust the math behind the cash-like payment system where computers keep
perfect record of transactions rather than trusting third parties.54
[16] Although blockchains employing PoW consensus algorithms are
extremely effective at preserving and securing blockchains, PoW
blockchains require nodes around the world to exert immense amounts of
computing power, which comes at a cost to the environment.55 Ethereum,
another highly touted and popular cryptocurrency blockchain, initially
employed a PoW consensus algorithm.56 The nodes operating on
Ethereum’s blockchain consumed around 73.2 terawatt hour (TWh)
annually, which is the energy equivalent of a medium-sized country like
Austria.57 Tesla, at one point, accepted Bitcoin to purchase its vehicles, but
52 Matthew Sparkes, Quantum computers are a million times too small to hack bitcoin,
NEW SCIENTIST (Jan. 25, 2022), https://www.newscientist.com/article/2305646-quantum-
computers-are-a-million-times-too-small-to-hack-bitcoin/ [https://perma.cc/ADR5-
T44F].
53 Id.
54 See Bitcoin Market Cap (I:BMC), YCHARTS, https://ycharts.com/indicators/bitcoin_
market_cap [https://perma.cc/297Y-UV3M] (last visited Oct. 29, 2023).
55 See Amy Castor, Why Ethereum is switching to proof of stake and how it will work,
MIT TECH. REV. (Mar. 4, 2022), https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/03/04/
1046636/ethereum-blockchain-proof-of-stake/ [https://perma.cc/NM68-5E7C].
56 Id.
57 Alice Feng, Is Cryptomining Harming the Environment?, PSCI (Feb. 27, 2021),
https://psci.princeton.edu/tips/2021/2/27/is-cryptomining-harming-the-environment
[https://perma.cc/ZY8W-57GS].
58
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
suspended vehicle purchases using Bitcoin due to climate change
concerns.58 Elon Musk elaborated on the decision in a tweet, saying,
“[c]ryptocurrency is a good idea on many levels and we believe it has a
promising future, but this cannot come at great cost to the environment.”59
In response to the PoW blockchains’ negative externalities, the Proof of
Stake (PoS) consensus algorithm was created as an environmentally
friendly alternative.60
2. Proof of Stake Consensus Algorithms
[17] As discussed above, PoW consensus algorithms require nodes
around the world to race each other to solve a complex mathematical
function (the hash puzzle)—the winner of the race being rewarded with
mining a block.61 Consequently, PoW consensus algorithms allocate block
mining proportionally to the relative computing power a node has (i.e., the
nodes that can prove their work the most).62 PoS consensus algorithms, on
the other hand, use game theory and randomization to choose which node
58 Lora Kolodny, Elon Musk says Tesla will stop accepting bitcoin for car purchases,
citing environmental concerns, CNBC, https://www.cnbc.com/2021/05/12/elon-musk-
says-tesla-will-stop-accepting-bitcoin-for-car-purchases.html [https://perma.cc/QZ8J-
DXNK] (last updated May 12, 2021, 8:26 PM).
59 Id.
60 Jake Frankenfield, What Does Proof-of-Stake (PoS) Mean in Crypto?, INVESTOPEDIA,
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-stake-pos.asp [https://perma.cc/QTY9-
8MZ6] (last updated May 31, 2023).
61 Napoletano, supra note 38.
62 Sivleen Kaur et al., A Research Survey on Applications of Consensus Protocols in
Blockchain, 2021 HINDAWI: SEC. & COMMC’N NETWORKS 1, 5 (Jan. 22, 2021),
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6693731 [https://perma.cc/PQG3-NXQN].
59
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
gets to validate the new block.63 Blockchains employing a PoS consensus
algorithm include Cardano (ADA), Tezos (XTZ), Binance Coin (BNB),
Avalanche (AVAX), and Algorand (ALGO).64 PoS blockchains consume
substantially less energy than PoW blockchains because selecting nodes to
validate transactions is a significantly less energy-intensive process than
nodes around the world racing to solve a hash puzzle.65 The Cardano
blockchain, for example, is 47,000 times more energy-efficient than
Bitcoin.66
[18] Under a PoS consensus algorithm, crypto holders can “stake” their
coins with nodes operating on the blockchain, and those nodes have a
chance to validate new blocks on the blockchain.67 When the node validates
a new block on the blockchain, the node and the individuals staking their
crypto with the node earn “staking rewards.”68 PoS blockchains have their
own distinct ways of operating and titling things, but there are three
common activities and functions necessary to understand PoS blockchains:
staking, the nodes on a PoS network, and staking rewards. This paper will
63 See Proof-of-stake vs. proof-of-work: Pros, cons, and differences explained,
COINTELEGRAPH, https://cointelegraph.com/learn/proof-of-stake-vs-proof-of-work:-
differences-explained [https://perma.cc/S49Z-RMFB] (last visited Oct. 6, 2023)
[hereinafter Proof-of-stake vs. proof-of-work].
64 See CryptoPolitan, How to Benefit from the Meteoric Rise of Proof of Stake Coins,
CRYPTORANK (Sept. 14, 2023), https://cryptorank.io/news/feed/14455-proof-of-stake-
coins [https://perma.cc/JZ96-AUJX].
65 See Proof-of-stake vs. proof-of-work, supra note 63.
66 Jordan Major, Cardano is 47,000x more energy-efficient than Bitcoin, data shows,
FINBOLD (Feb. 22, 2022), https://finbold.com/cardano-is-47000x-more-energy-efficient-
than-bitcoin-data-shows/ [https://perma.cc/GP7A-FKNE].
67 Napoletano, supra note 38.
68 Lyle Daly, What is Staking in Crypto?, THE MOTLEY FOOL, https://www.fool.com/
terms/s/staking/ [https://perma.cc/79V8-U2K2] (last updated Apr. 21, 2023, 9:55 AM).
60
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
use the Cardano blockchain and its native cryptocurrency, ADA, as an
example.
[19] Consider an individual possessing 1,000 ADA in their wallet. The
individual could let the ADA sit in their wallet, or they could stake their
ADA with a node on the Cardano network to earn staking rewards (nodes
on the Cardano network are referred to as “stake pool operators”).69 Staking
ADA is a passive investment that yields staking rewards, which are similar
to the interest payments on savings accounts in the traditional world of
finance.70 As of this writing, staking ADA yields an estimated 3.3% annual
return on the principal ADA invested.71 Cardano offers self-custodian
staking, which allows users to stake their ADA with a stake pool operator
without the crypto even leaving their wallet.72 To stake their 1,000 ADA
with self-custodian staking, the individual would log into their wallet, select
the stake pool operator they want to stake their ADA with, and hit “stake.”
Cardano’s PoS consensus algorithm, titled Ouroboros, yields staking
rewards every five days.73 Individuals are permitted to either “claim” their
69 See Stake Pool Operation, CARDANO, https://cardano.org/stake-pool-operation/
[https://perma.cc/L3ZD-L868] (last visited Oct. 6, 2023).
70 Staking rewards – what are they?, BITPANDA, https://www.bitpanda.com/academy/en/
lessons/staking-rewards-what-are-they/ [https://perma.cc/NDF6-C6K7] (last visited Oct.
6, 2023).
71 Cardano ADA Staking Validators & Calculator, STAKING REWARDS, https://www.
stakingrewards.com/asset/cardano?category=pos&sort=staked_tokens&timeframe=30d&
order=desc&verifiedFirst=true [https://perma.cc/9BBK-K57Q] (last visited Oct. 6, 2023)
[hereinafter Stake ADA].
72 Albert Kim, Cardano 101: Self-custodial Staking and Why it is Important, EMURGO
(Feb. 9, 2023), https://emurgo.io/cardano-101-self-custodial-staking/
[https://perma.cc/8LNW-3Z7Y].
73 See Tommy Kammerer, (Re)introduction to Cardano, CARDANO DEV. PORTAL,
https://developers.cardano.org/docs/operate-a-stake-pool/introduction-to-cardano/
[https://perma.cc/WVZ2-4ZZA] (last updated May 15, 2023) [hereinafter Kammerer,
(Re)introduction to Cardano].
61
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
staking rewards from the stake pool operators or leave them unclaimed, and
unclaimed staking rewards are added to the principal ADA amount staked.74
So here, the individual could stake their 1,000 ADA with a stake pool
operator on January 1 and log into their wallet on December 31 to see 1,033
ADA.
[20] The nodes on the Cardano network are called stake pool operators
because they pool other peoples’ staked ADA together to help run the
blockchain.75 Operating a stake pool on the Cardano network does not
require the expensive hardware required to mine Bitcoin, but stake pool
operators must administer, maintain, and secure their own server.76 While
Ouroboros utilizes game theory and randomization to choose which nodes
validate new blocks,77 on average, stake pool operators are selected to
validate new blocks in proportion to the node’s current holdings (i.e., the
amount the node proves it has at stake). 78 For example, if a Cardano stake
pool operator holds 1% of all ADA, the stake pool operator will be selected
to validate, on average, 1% of all new blocks on the Cardano blockchain.79
The stake pool operator gets their cut of the staking rewards, which is
74 See Stake ADA, supra note 71.
75 Kammerer, (Re)introduction to Cardano, supra note 73.
76 See Tommy Kammerer, Operate a Stake Pool, CARDANO DEV. PORTAL,
https://developers.cardano.org/docs/operate-a-stake-pool/ [https://perma.cc/2JC8-2W6P]
(last updated May 15, 2023) [hereinafter Kammerer, Operate a Stake Pool].
77 Aggelos Kiayias et al., Ouroboros: A Provably Secure Proof-of-Stake Blockchain
Protocol, CRYPTOLOGY EPRINT ARCHIVE at 3 (July 20, 2019), https://eprint.iacr.org/
2016/889.pdf [https://perma.cc/3X9N-ZGPY] (describing the use of coin-flipping as
protocol for randomization); see Stake ADA, supra note 71 (stating that Ouroboros uses a
game-theoretic approach).
78 Id. at 1–2.
79 See id. at 1.
62
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
around 4.3% annual return on the ADA staked,80 and the rest of the rewards
go to the individuals who staked their ADA with the node (around 3.3%
annual return).81
[21] In short, PoS blockchains consume substantially less energy than
PoW blockchains because the PoS block validation process consumes less
energy.82 The individuals operating nodes on a PoW blockchain are called
“crypto miners,” and they compete amongst each other to solve hash
puzzles and earn crypto mining rewards.83 Nodes on a PoS blockchain are
called “stake pool operators” and are selected to validate new blocks in a
randomized order.84 On average, however, PoS consensus algorithms select
nodes to validate new blocks in proportion to the amount of cryptocurrency
the nodes have staked.85
[22] The PoW consensus algorithm was created first, and the United
States federal government has had more time to issue guidance and rulings
on activities in PoW blockchains. As discussed in Sections III, IV and V,
PoS blockchains and the activities surrounding staking are becoming a point
of emphasis for the United States federal government.
80 Stake ADA, supra note 71.
81 Id.
82 Johannes Sedlmeir et al., The Energy Consumption of Blockchain Technology: Beyond
Myth, 62 BUS. & INFO. SYS. ENG’G 599, 604 (2020), https://link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s12599-020-00656-x [https://perma.cc/65UH-R5XW].
83 Miner Meaning, LEDGER (Aug. 15, 2023), https://www.ledger.com/academy/glossary/
miner [https://perma.cc/W43A-NWZ5].
84 Kiayias et al., supra note 77 at 1; Kammerer, (Re)introduction to Cardano, supra note
73.
85 Kiayias et al., supra note 77 at 1–2.
63
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[23] This paper’s purpose is, in part, to explain cryptocurrency to the
common person. With a better understanding of the technologies underlying
cryptocurrency, it is equally helpful to explain how people purchase and
hold cryptocurrencies.
D. How Investors Purchase and Hold Cryptocurrency
[24] As a practical matter, regardless of what type of cryptocurrencies
investors purchase, there are established methods of purchasing and holding
cryptocurrencies. First, people mostly purchase cryptocurrencies on
centralized exchanges such as Binance, Coinbase, and KuCoin.86 Many
crypto investors leave their crypto holdings on centralized exchanges, but
this will change in the future as more people are increasingly using crypto
wallets.87
1. Storing Cryptocurrency on a Centralized Exchange
[25] Leaving crypto on a centralized exchange allows investors to sell
and purchase crypto assets quickly, and investors can exchange crypto
assets for cash or another crypto asset, all on the exchange.88 Further,
investors can watch the value of their entire crypto portfolio, which may
86 See Nathan Reiff, What Are Centralized Cryptocurrency Exchanges?, INVESTOPEDIA,
https://www.investopedia.com/tech/what-are-centralized-cryptocurrency-exchanges/
[https://perma.cc/9CK3-8N5R] (last updated July 31, 2023) [hereinafter Reiff,
Centralized Cryptocurrency Exchanges]; Dock David Treece, Binance vs. Coinbase:
Which Crypto Exchange Is Right For You?, FORBES (Sep. 1, 2023, 4:49 PM),
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/cryptocurrency/binance-vs-coinbase/
[https://perma.cc/WM9L-6XHN] (last updated Sep. 1, 2023, 4:49 PM).
87 See Crypto Wallet Market Size, Share, and Growth Report, GRAND VIEW RSCH.,
https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/crypto-wallet-market-report
[https://perma.cc/Z33Z-BD6F] (last visited Oct. 1, 2023).
88 See Reiff, Centralized Cryptocurrency Exchanges, supra note 86.
64
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
consist of dozens of different cryptos, all on the exchange.89 However, when
someone purchases cryptocurrency and leaves it on a centralized exchange,
they do not own the cryptocurrency itself—rather, what they own is a
redeemable ticket for the right to their cryptocurrency.90
[26] There is a popular phrase amongst cryptocurrency enthusiasts: “not
your keys, not your coins.”91 Each crypto token has a cryptographic key
associated with it, and possessing the keys represents actual ownership of
the cryptocurrency.92 As such, the person or exchange possessing the crypto
keys is the sole custodian of the cryptocurrency, which means they can sell
it, trade it, or send it as they please. When cryptocurrency is left on a
centralized exchange, the exchange possesses the keys to your crypto, and
you are entrusting a third party with custody of your funds.93 Contrarily,
crypto was created, in part, to establish a payment system where no third
party has control over your funds.94 A minority of crypto is stored off
exchanges in crypto wallets, where the wallet owner possesses the crypto
keys.95
89 See generally id. (comparing the centralized exchange to the stock market where
instead of stocks, the portfolio compromises of various cryptos).
90 See Why and How to Withdraw Your Bitcoin from Exchanges, BITCOIN MAG. (July 26,
2022), https://bitcoinmagazine.com/guides/why-and-how-to-withdraw-your-bitcoin-
from-exchanges [https://perma.cc/TE6B-ASLB].
91 Id.
92 See id.
93 Id.
94 Nakamoto, supra note 11.
95 See Why and How to Withdraw Your Bitcoin from Exchanges, supra note 90.
65
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
2. Storing Cryptocurrency on a Wallet
[27] There are dozens of different brands of crypto wallets available, and
crypto wallets vary in which cryptocurrencies they are compatible with.
Sending crypto from an exchange to a wallet is a fairly simple process: users
input the amount of crypto they are sending and the recipient’s crypto wallet
address, and hit send.96 Blockchains vary in how quickly they process
transactions, but the crypto could be in the recipient’s wallet within
seconds.97 Crypto wallets can be bifurcated into two general categories:
software wallets and hardware wallets.
a. Software Wallets
[28] A software wallet is an entirely digital crypto wallet.98 Software
wallets are applications you can use on your computer or, in some instances,
mobile phone.99 MetaMask is a popular software wallet compatible with all
Ethereum network cryptos.100 MetaMask is free, takes only minutes to set
up, and is a downloadable application on your internet browser and mobile
96 See Crypto transfers, ROBINHOOD, https://robinhood.com/us/en/support/articles/
cryptocurrency-wallets/ [https://perma.cc/XS37-CRKV] (last visited Oct. 1, 2023).
97 Harshini, Top 10 Cryptocurrencies with Their High Transaction Speeds in 2023,
ANALYTICS INSIGHT (Mar. 20, 2023), https://www.analyticsinsight.net/top-10-
cryptocurrencies-with-their-high-transaction-speeds-in-2023/ [https://perma.cc/HAJ7-
6RJG].
98 See What is Software Wallet, BITDEGREE, https://www.bitdegree.org/crypto/learn/
crypto-terms/what-is-software-wallet [https://perma.cc/96X6-J54Y] (last visited Oct. 1,
2023).
99 Id.
100 Metamask: The Leading Non-Custodial Wallet, BITDEGREE, https://www.bitdegree.
org/crypto/learn/what-is-metamask [https://perma.cc/4M59-4UJZ] (last visited Oct. 1,
2023).
66
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
phone.101 In November of 2021, the MetaMask creator issued a press release
claiming MetaMask surpassed 21 million monthly active users.102 Users
creating a new MetaMask wallet receive a “seed phrase,”103 which is a series
of 12 to 24 randomly generated words that provides the data needed to
recover a lost or broken crypto wallet.104 Users will choose a password,
which must be input every time the user logs into the wallet or tries to send
funds from the wallet.105
[29] A notable benefit of software wallets is that they provide users with
the keys to their crypto; you can only access the crypto if you know a wallet
owner’s login information.106 Further, software wallets are very accessible,
and it is easy to send or receive crypto on them (if you know the login
information).107 For this reason, software wallets are often called “hot”
101 See id.
102 MetaMask Surpasses 21 Million MAUs as Consensys Raises $200 Million to Make
Web3 Universally Easy to Use, Access, and Build On, CONSENSYS (Nov. 17, 2021),
https://consensys.net/blog/press-release/metamask-surpasses-21-million-maus-as-
consensys-raises-200-million-%20to-make-web3-universally-easy-to-use-access-and-
build-on/ [https://perma.cc/57E9-WJ8V].
103 User Guide: Secret Recovery Phrase, password, and private keys, METAMASK (Mar.
2023), https://support.metamask.io/hc/en-us/articles/4404722782107-User-Guide-Secret-
Recovery-Phrase-password-%20and-private-keys [https://perma.cc/GL2E-V6H5].
104 Id.
105 See id.
106 See id.
107 See Frequently Asked Questions, METAMASK, https://metamask.io/faqs/
[https://perma.cc/AF96-4U6F].
67
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
wallets.108 The biggest disadvantage of software wallets is that the wallets
are connected to the internet, which exposes them to viruses or hackers.109
Hardware wallets, often called “cold” wallets, are the most secure option
available for holding and storing crypto.110
b. Hardware Wallets
[30] Hardware wallets are physical devices used to store your crypto’s
keys offline.111 Ledger and Trezor are among the highest respected
hardware wallet manufacturers.112 The Ledger Nano X is similar in size and
appearance to a thumb drive, and the offline storage can be accessed with a
Bluetooth or USB connection on a computer or mobile phone.113 The Trezor
Model T is regarded as one of the most secure hardware wallets and is
compatible with over 1,000 different cryptocurrencies, including Bitcoin.114
The greatest advantage hardware wallets have over software wallets is the
additional security from storing your crypto offline. Hardware wallets are
typically left entirely disconnected from a computer, which is why people
108 CFI Team, Cryptocurrency Wallet, CORP. FIN. INS. (Feb. 1, 2023),
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/cryptocurrency/cryptocurrency-wallet/
[https://perma.cc/BV6J-4DCR].
109 Patrick McGimpsey, Hardware Wallets Explained, FORBES ADVISOR AUSTL.,
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/au/investing/cryptocurrency/hardware-wallets-
explained/ [https://perma.cc/3D6U-EBR9] (last updated Mar. 14, 2023, 12:12 PM).
110 CFI Team, supra note 108.
111 McGimpsey, supra note 109.
112 Id.
113 See Ledger Nano X, LEDGER, https://shop.ledger.com/products/ledger-nano-x
[https://perma.cc/Y8VL-GBJN] (last visited Oct. 6, 2023).
114 Evan Jones, Trezor Model T Review: Still Worth the Hype in 2023?,
CRYPTOVANTAGE (Oct. 6, 2023), https://www.cryptovantage.com/best-crypto-
wallets/trezor-model-t/ [https://perma.cc/BPN8-P9Q3].
68
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
refer to them as “cold” wallets.115 However, software wallets are free, while
the Ledger Nano X and Trezor Model T currently cost $149.00 and $219.00,
respectively.116
[31] The global crypto wallet market size was valued at $8.42 billion in
2022, and some projections indicate that figure will grow at 24.8% per year
from 2023 to 2030.117 Increasingly, individuals are opting to hold their
crypto in their own wallets rather than leaving it on a centralized exchange,
and there is one person in particular to thank for that: Sam Bankman-Fried,
founder of the once-popular crypto exchange, FTX.
3. Not Your Keys, Not Your Coins: Sam Bankman-Fried
and FTX
[32] Sam Bankman-Fried is a 31-year-old M.I.T. graduate and convicted
felon.118 In 2017, he exploited an arbitrage in the Bitcoin markets known as
the “Kimchi Swap,” where he would purchase Bitcoin on one crypto
exchange and sell it on exchanges in other countries posting higher
115 CFI Team, supra note 108.
116 Ledger Nano X, supra note 113; Trezor Model T, TREZOR, https://trezor.io/trezor-
model-t?gclid=Cj0KCQjw8e-
gBhD0ARIsAJiDsaWSlFTATNkIIl2r398HdjdGmimweZWm7xirAv-Ztzg705jJ-
ruL3LMaAge6EALw_wcB [https://perma.cc/EQZ6-5SAH] (last visited Oct. 6, 2023).
117 Crypto Wallet Market Size, Share & Growth Report, supra note 87.
118 David Gura, Sam Bankman-Fried is found guilty of all charges in FTX’s spectacular
collapse, NPR, https://www.npr.org/2023/11/02/1210100678/sam-bankman-fried-trial-
verdict-ftx-crypto [https://perma.cc/K5U8-C4DX] (last updated Nov. 2, 2023, 10:20
PM).
69
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
prices.119 Bankman-Fried wanted to scale his operation, so he founded
Alameda Research.120 Alameda Research was wildly successful, and
Bankman-Fried used his earnings and lured capital from investors to found
his very own crypto exchange, FTX, in 2019.121 Alameda Research and
FTX operated alongside each other inside FTX’s office headquarters in the
Bahamas.122
[33] In 2021 alone, FTX facilitated $719 billion in crypto exchanges.123
By January of 2022, FTX was the third-largest cryptocurrency exchange in
119 MacKenzie Sigalos, From $32 billion to criminal investigations: How Sam Bankman-
Fried’s crypto empire vanished overnight, CNBC,
https://www.cnbc.com/2022/11/15/how-sam-bankman-frieds-ftx-alameda-empire-
vanished-overnight.html [https://perma.cc/7ARD-BAJF] (last updated Nov. 16, 2022,
12:05 AM).
120 Id.
121 Whizy Kim, Sam Bankman-Fried’s arrest is the culmination of an epic flameout,
VOX, https://www.vox.com/the-goods/23458837/sam-bankman-fried-ftx-sbf-downfall-
explained [https://perma.cc/T4N6-9PDQ] (last updated Dec. 22, 2022, 3:11 PM).
122 Tracy Wang, Bankman-Fried’s Cabal of Roommates in the Bahamas Ran His Crypto
Empire – and Dated. Other Employees Have Lots of Questons, COINDESK,
https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/11/10/bankman-frieds-cabal-of-roommates-in-
the-bahamas-ran-his-crypto-empire-and-dated-other-employees-have-lots-of-questions/
[https://perma.cc/PJ7J-X6XP] (last updated Aug. 16, 2023, 5:57 PM).
123 David Curry, FTX Revenue and Usage Statistics (2023), BUS. OF APPS,
https://www.businessofapps.com/data/ftx-statistics/ [https://perma.cc/TJZ2-C9GP] (last
updated Jan. 9, 2023).
70
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
the world and boasted a $32 billion valuation.124 FTX struck partnerships
with household names like Visa, MLB, Tom Brady, Stephen Curry, and
Kevin O’Leary.125 Bankman-Fried had a net worth of approximately $16
billion, and people were comparing him to finance magnates like Warren
Buffet.126 Bankman-Fried was viewed as a visionary; FTX created its own
crypto called FTT, which reached an all-time-high price of $85.02 per coin
in September 2021, representing a $12.73 billion market cap.127 People felt
comfortable leaving their funds on FTX because they trusted Bankman-
Fried with the keys to their crypto.128 FTX, and Bankman-Fried’s public
124 Ryan Browne, Cryptocurrency exchange FTX hits $32 billion valuation despite bear
market fears, CNBC, https://www.cnbc.com/2022/01/31/crypto-exchange-ftx-valued-at-
32-billion-amid-bitcoin-price-plunge.html [https://perma.cc/T574-XY5J] (last updated
Jan. 31, 2022, 7:44 PM); Nathan Reiff, The Collapse of FTX: What Went Wrong With the
Crypto Exchange?, INVESTOPEDIA, https://www.investopedia.com/what-went-wrong-
with-ftx-6828447 [https://perma.cc/ZM89-AK3M] (last updated Feb. 27, 2023)
[hereinafter Reiff, The Collapse of FTX].
125 Luc Olinga, FTX Collapse: Tom Brady, Steph Curry and ‘Mr. Wonderful’ Are in Big
Trouble, THE STREET CRYPTO (Nov. 16, 2022, 4:35 PM), https://www.thestreet.com/
cryptocurrency/ftx-collapse-tom-brady-steph-curry-and-mr-wonderful-are-in-big-trouble
[https://perma.cc/FG2W-5W3N]; Kate Rooney, Visa partners with FTX in a bet that
shoppers still want to spend cryptocurrencies in a bear market, CNBC,
https://www.cnbc.com/2022/10/07/visa-partners-with-ftx-in-a-bet-that-shoppers-still-
want-to-spend-cryptocurrencies-in-a-bear-market.html [https://perma.cc/MML2-W8MM
] (last updated Oct. 7, 2022, 10:34 AM); Justin Byers, MLB Latest To Cut Ties With FTX,
FRONT OFFICE SPORTS (Nov. 18, 2022, 02:02 PM), https://frontofficesports.com/mlb-
latest-to-cut-ties-with-ftx/ [https://perma.cc/EUL2-LJRP].
126 Kim, supra note 121.
127 FTX Token price today, FTT to USD live price, marketcap and chart,
COINMARKETCAP, https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/ftx-token/
[https://perma.cc/NUB3-UPV5] (last visited Oct. 6, 2023).
128 See Allison Morrow, Customers who trusted crypto giant FTX may be left with
nothing, CNN, https://www.cnn.com/2022/11/14/business/ftx-customer-money-
bankruptcy/index.html [https://perma.cc/M46F-QEL8] (last updated Nov. 15, 2022, 4:35
AM).
71
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
perception, came crashing down within hours after a few tweets from
Changpeng Zhao (CZ), the CEO of FTX’s rival crypto exchange,
Binance.129
[34] Bankman-Fried’s original business venture, Alameda Research, was
in a $10 billion hole as a result of speculative venture investments, lavish
real estate investments, and large political donations.130 In an effort to keep
Alameda Research afloat, Bankman-Fried misappropriated FTX’s
customers’ funds to Alameda Research.131 Binance held a minority stake in
FTX, but exited the investment in 2021 and received $2.1 billion in
cryptocurrencies in return, including FTT coins worth $529 million.132 On
November 6, 2022—allegedly after CZ realized Bankman-Fried was
misappropriating customer funds—CZ tweeted his intention to sell
Binance’s $529 million worth of FTT coins.133 After CZ’s ominous tweet,
many investors began withdrawing their funds from FTX as quickly as
possible, which led to a multi-billion dollar liquidity crisis.134 FTX lacked
the solvency to fulfill its customers’ withdrawals, so FTX suspended
129 See Sigalos, supra note 119.
130 See Complaint at 2, SEC v. Sam Bankman-Fried, No. 22-cv-10501 (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 13,
2022), https://www.sec.gov/files/litigation/complaints/2023/comp25616.pdf
[https://perma.cc/UR8X-N8F8].
131 Id.
132 Olga Kharif, Binance to Sell $529 Million of Bankman-Fried’s FTT Token,
BLOOMBERG (Nov. 6, 2022, 2:12 PM), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/
202211-06/binance-to-sell-529-million-of-ftt-token-amids-revelations#xj4y7vzkg
[https://perma.cc/47CB-D4BM].
133 Sigalos, supra note 119.
134 Samantha Delouya, Sam Bankman-Fried reportedly said it was a mistake to pick a
fight with Binance CEO Changpeng Zhao: ‘not a good strategic move on my part”, BUS.
INSIDER (Nov. 14, 2022, 8:15 PM), https://www.businessinsider.com/sam-bankman-
fried-ftx-binance-changpeng-zhao-cz-crypto-report-2022-11 [https://perma.cc/UKX8-
8QRF].
72
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
withdrawals, and customers could not get their funds back out of the
exchange.135
[35] FTX filed for bankruptcy on November 11, 2022, just five days after
CZ’s tweet.136 On December 12, 2022, Bankman-Fried was arrested in the
Bahamas after the United States Department of Justice indicted him on eight
counts, including conspiracy to commit wire fraud, wire fraud, conspiracy
to commit commodities fraud, conspiracy to commit securities fraud,
conspiracy to commit money laundering, and conspiracy to defraud the
Federal Election Commission and commit campaign finance violations.137
Sam Bankman-Fried was ordered to remain on house arrest after posting a
$250 million bond, but was remanded to jail after being accused of witness
tampering.138 And on November 2, 2023, a jury found Sam Bankman-Fried
guilty of two counts of wire fraud and five counts charging conspiracies to
commit wire fraud, securities fraud, commodities fraud, and money
135 Niket Nishant, FTX suspends addition of new clients, withdrawals, REUTERS (Nov. 10,
2022, 6:35 AM), https://www.reuters.com/technology/ftx-suspends-onboarding-new-
clients-2022-11-10/ [https://perma.cc/Z7TZ-4NSB].
136 Ryan Browne, FTX says it could have over 1 million creditors in new bankruptcy
filing, CNBC, https://www.cnbc.com/2022/11/15/ftx-says-could-have-over-1-million-
creditors-in-new-bankruptcy-filing.html [https://perma.cc/VBL9-TR3P] (last updated
Nov. 15, 2022, 2:14 PM).
137 Press Release, U.S. Att’y Off., S. Dist. N.Y., United States Attorney Announces
Charges Against FTX Founder Samuel Bankman-Fried (Dec. 13, 2022),
https://www.justice.gov/usao-sdny/pr/united-states-attorney-announces-charges-against-
ftx-founder-samuel-bankman-fried [https://perma.cc/FE3Z-V3DU].
138 Luc Cohen & Jody Godoy, FTX’s Bankman-Fried headed for jail over alleged witness
tampering, REUTERS (Aug. 11, 2023, 7:22 PM), https://www.reuters.com/legal/ftxs-
bankman-fried-seeking-avoid-jail-due-back-court-2023-08-11/ [https://perma.cc/JG7G-
YRJ].
73
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
laundering.139 He is facing up to 115 years in prison and will be sentenced
in March of 2024.140
[36] Crypto investors who did not transfer their assets to their own
wallets and instead left their funds on the FTX exchange became creditors
to a bankruptcy proceeding rather than customers of a trusted exchange.141
According to a September 11, 2023 bankruptcy filing, bankruptcy advisors
have recovered approximately $7 billion of FTX assets, which pales in
comparison to the $16 billion in customer claims and $65 billion of non-
customer claims filed with FTX’s bankruptcy advisors.142
[37] In short, when a crypto investor leaves their crypto on a centralized
exchange, the centralized exchange has actual possession of the crypto
because they retain possession over the crypto keys.143 To have actual
possession of their crypto’s keys, investors must transfer the crypto from an
exchange to a hardware or software wallet.144 Bankman-Fried was able to
139 McKenzie Sigalos, Sam Bankman-Fried found guilty on all seven criminal fraud
counts, CNBC (Nov. 2, 2023 at 7:51 PM), https://www.cnbc.com/2023/11/02/sam-
bankman-fried-found-guilty-on-all-seven-criminal-fraud-counts.html
[https://perma.cc/Q59S-KKD4].
140 Id.
141 Id.
142 Notice of Presentation to Stakeholders at 8-9, In re FTX Trading LTD., No. 22-11068
(Bankr. D. Del. Sep. 11, 2023), https://assets.bwbx.io/documents/users/iqjWHBFdfxIU/
rGgfh7D1z_38/v0 [https://perma.cc/7MWC-87GH].
143 Gaurav Roy, What is a Centralized Cryptocurrency Exchange (CEX)?, LEDGER ACAD.
(June 16, 2023), https://www.ledger.com/academy/topics/crypto/what-is-a-centralized-
cryptocurrency-exchange-cex [https://perma.cc/N3LP-RLMU].
144 Jake Frankenfield et al., Cryptocurrency Wallet: What It Is, How It Works, Types,
Security, INVESTOPEDIA, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/bitcoin-wallet.asp
[https://perma.cc/9CKN-2S9D] (last updated Aug. 29, 2023).
74
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
steal billions of dollars from FTX’s customers because they entrusted FTX
with their crypto’s keys.145
[38] The FTX bankruptcy and Bankman-Fried’s thefts had a chilling
effect on the crypto industry, as evidenced by the crypto market cap falling
by $183 billion in the days following CZ’s tweet.146 Investors were left
questioning how Bankman-Fried could steal billions of dollars from
customers without a government agency first uncovering the scam. Crypto
exchanges across the world had to regain their customers’ trust. One
exchange, Coinbase, acted quickly to tell the world how it was different
from FTX.147
4. Coinbase: A Crypto Exchange Headquartered in the
United States
[39] Coinbase, the largest crypto exchange in the United States, has
approximately 110 million verified users and close to $80 billion in assets
on the platform.148 In the days following the FTX bankruptcy, Coinbase
went on the offensive by obtaining a full-page advertisement in the Wall
145 Rohan Goswami & MacKenzie Sigalos, How Sam Bankman-Fried swindled $8 billion
in customer money, according to federal prosecutors, CNBC, https://www.cnbc.com/
2022/12/18/how-sam-bankman-fried-ran-8-billion-fraud-government-prosecutors.html
[https://perma.cc/763H-FU8R] (last updated Dec. 19, 2022, 2:06 PM).
146 Lyllah Ledesma, FTX Collapse Leaves Total Crypto Market Cap Under $800B, Close
to 2022 Low, COINDESK (Nov. 17, 2022, 5:05 PM), https://www.coindesk.com/markets/
2022/11/17/ftx-collapse-leaves-total-crypto-market-cap-under-800b-close-to-2022-low/
[https://perma.cc/76L8-DFG5].
147 Steve Mollman, Coinbase CEO Brian Armstrong says it’s ‘baffling’ FTX’s Sam
Bankman-Fried isn’t ‘in custody already’, YAHOO (Dec. 3, 2022), https://www.yahoo.
com/video/coinbase-ceo-brian-armstrong-says-231208022.html [https://perma.cc/A46A-
33BM].
148 Will Robinson, Introducing Base, COINBASE (Feb. 23, 2023), https://www.coinbase.
com/blog/introducing-base [https://perma.cc/T72A-ECN2].
75
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
Street Journal that read, “Trust us.” in a prominent typeface.149 Below the
eye-catching plea for trust, Coinbase explained to its audience that:
We are headquartered in the United States; We hold our
customers’ assets 1:1; We don’t trade against our customers,
and we don’t leverage their funds without consent; We
provide the transparent accounting and audits that are
required of a public company[.]150
[40] In short, Coinbase relied on its United States roots, promised to
never touch or interfere with its customers’ funds without consent, and
noted the regulations and reporting requirements United States public
corporations must follow.151 So, what are the regulations surrounding a
public company in the United States operating a crypto exchange, and how
is crypto regulated if it is in someone’s wallet? Who in the United States
federal government should have known about FTX’s scheme and protected
investors, if anyone? Section III addresses these questions.
III. HOW THE UNITED STATES REGULATES CRYPTOCURRENCY
[41] United States federal agencies have attempted to apply an already-
existing regulatory framework to a brand-new technology.152 In some cases,
cryptocurrency is categorized as a commodity, the same asset-type as eggs
and wheat, and subject to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission’s
149 Patrick Coffee, Crypto Brands Reposition Themselves in Wake of FTX and Market
Tumble, WALL ST. J. (Feb. 7, 2023, 6:00 AM), https://www.wsj.com/articles/crypto-
brands-reposition-themselves-in-wake-of-ftx-and-market-tumble-11675731537
[https://perma.cc/DZ7E-PDF5].
150 Max Erdenberger, Coinbase – Trust Us, ERDENBERGER, https://www.erdenberger.me/
project/coinbase-trust-us [https://perma.cc/A7GH-86QF].
151 Id.
152 Id.
76
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
(CFTC) jurisdiction.153 In other cases, cryptocurrency is categorized as a
security and treated like stock in a company, which is regulated by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).154 Both the CFTC and SEC
have exerted their jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies in different
circumstances, even though cryptocurrencies have qualities distinct from
both commodities and securities.155 Thus, the answer to the question of how
the United States regulates cryptocurrency is “it depends.”
A. Congressional Power Under the Constitution: The SEC and
the CFTC
[42] The U.S. Constitution grants Congress with the power “to regulate
commerce with foreign nations, among States . . . .”156 This Constitutional
provision, known as the Commerce Clause, has been interpreted broadly
and grants Congress the power to regulate a wide range of activities.157 The
Constitution also grants Congress the power to create its own agencies and
153 Robert Stevens, Securities vs. Commodities: Why It Matters For Crypto, COINDESK,
https://www.coindesk.com/learn/securities-vs-commodities-why-it-matters-for-crypto/
[https://perma.cc/UF2N-TJLF] (last updated May 5, 2023, 11:16 AM).
154 Id.
155 See Timothy G. Massad & Howell E. Jackson, How to Improve Regulation of Crypto
Today–Without Congressional Action–and Make the Industry Pay For It, BROOKINGS
INST., 1–10 (Working Paper No. 79, 2022), https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2022/10/WP79-Massad-Jackson-updated-2.pdf [https://perma.cc/43E2-
WJXZ]; see also Cheryl L. Isaac et al., CFTC and SEC Perspectives on Cryptocurrency
and Digital Assets – Volume I: A Jurisdictional Overview, K&L GATES, 1–3, 5–7 (May 6,
2022), https://www.klgates.com/CFTC-and-SEC-Perspectives-on-Cryptocurrency-and-
Digital-Assets-Volume-I-A-Jurisdictional-Overview-5-6-2022 [https://perma.cc/779S-
KJW8].
156 U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8, cl. 3.
157 Commerce Clause, CORNELL L. SCH.: LEGAL INFO. INST., https://www.law.cornell.
edu/wex/commerce_clause [https://perma.cc/KZ4N-7TEX] (last updated July 2022).
77
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
delegate those agencies law-making power over certain issues.158 Congress
used its Commerce Clause and delegation powers to protect investors and
avoid fraud on markets when it established the SEC and CFTC.159
[43] After the stock market crash of 1929, Congress passed the Securities
Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.160 Together, the
securities laws require publicly traded companies to register with the SEC;
disclose financial and other important information; and refrain from
engaging in certain types of fraud, deceit, and misrepresentation.161 The
Securities Act of 1933 regulates companies selling their securities directly
to the public,162 while the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 regulates
securities transactions on secondary markets.163 The 1934 Act also
158 U.S. CONST. art. I, § 1.
159 See Mission, SEC, https://www.sec.gov/about/mission [https://perma.cc/MXU6-
X8TZ] (last modified Aug. 29, 2023); see also John H. Stassen, The Commodity
Exchange Act In Perspective a Short and Not-So-Reverent History of Futures Trading
Legislation In the United Legislation In the United States, 39 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 825,
830, 832–835 (1982).
160 The Role of the SEC, INV.GOV, https://www.investor.gov/introduction-
investing/investing-basics/role-sec [https://perma.cc/YV7B-8CYK] (last visited Sept. 24,
2023).
161 See The Laws That Govern the Securities Industry, SEC, https://www.sec.gov/about/
about-securities-laws [https://perma.cc/9D83-P5HM] (last modified Oct. 1, 2013).
162 What Is the Securities Act of 1933?, WINSTON & STRAWN, https://winston.com/en/
legal-glossary/what-is-securities-act-of-1933 [https://perma.cc/6PSU-SW2L] (last visited
Sept. 24, 2023).
163 Will Kenton, What Is the Securities Exchange Act of 1934? Reach and History,
INVESTOPEDIA, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/seact1934.asp
[https://perma.cc/3E9T-4YMU] (last updated Feb. 24, 2023).
78
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
established the SEC, which is tasked with enforcing both Acts and aims to
ensure a transparent and fair environment for investors.164
[44] In 1936, Congress created the Commodity Exchange Commission
(CEC) when it passed the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA).165 Congress
tasked the CEC with regulating the commodities enumerated in the CEA:
cotton, rice, mill feeds, butter, eggs, Irish potatoes, and grains.166 Congress
also tasked the CEC with overseeing futures contracts of the enumerated
commodities, and the Commodity Exchange Administration was formed
under the Department of Agriculture.167 In 1974, Congress amended the
CEA when it passed the Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of
1974, and the CEA turned into its own independent agency, the CFTC.168
Congress granted the CFTC with “powers greater than those of its
predecessor agency” by giving it exclusive jurisdiction over futures trading
in all commodities—beyond those specifically enumerated in the 1936
Act.169
164 Id.
165 US Futures Trading and Regulation Before the Creation of the CFTC, CFTC,
https://www.cftc.gov/About/HistoryoftheCFTC/history_precftc.html
[https://perma.cc/8Z9V-CCCQ] (last visited Sept. 24, 2023) [hereinafter US Futures
Trading and Regulation].
166 Id.
167 Id.
168 See Dan M. Berkovitz, Gen. Couns., CFTC, Position Limits and the Hedge
Exemption, Brief Legislative History (July 28, 2009), https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/
SpeechesTestimony/berkovitzstatement072809 [https://perma.cc/D4D8-GFNF].
169 CFTC History in the 1970s, CFTC, https://www.cftc.gov/About/HistoryoftheCFTC/
history_1970s.html [https://perma.cc/24EB-LYL6] (last visited Sept. 24, 2023).
79
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[45] The CFTC decided that cryptocurrencies are commodities in
some contexts and are thus subject to CFTC regulatory oversight.170 On
the other hand, the SEC decided that cryptocurrencies are securities in
some contexts and thus are subject to SEC regulatory oversight.171
Solutions to regulating cryptocurrencies will continue to develop in the
future, but the United States federal government has employed a
bifurcated approach to resolving this novel issue thus far.
B. Regulating Cryptocurrencies as Commodities
[46] The Commodity Exchange Act defines a commodity as “wheat,
cotton, rice, corn, oats . . . butter, eggs, . . . and all other goods and articles,
. . . and all services, rights, and interests . . . in which contracts for future
delivery are presently or in the future dealt in.”172 At first glance, it appears
cryptocurrencies would not fall within this definition of “commodity”—
especially considering the CEA’s original purpose was to regulate
agricultural commodities.173 However, the CFTC employed this definition
and argued that Bitcoin was a commodity in In the Matter of Coinflip, Inc.174
170 An Introduction to Virtual Currency, CFTC, https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/
2019-12/oceo_aivc0218.pdf [https://perma.cc/VKN5-TZ5X] (last visited Sept. 24, 2023).
171 See Press Release, SEC, SEC Charges Ripple and Two Executives with Conducting
$1.3 Billion Unregistered Securities Offering (Dec. 22, 2020), www.sec.gov/news/press-
release/2020-338 [https://perma.cc/CRE2-WMBR] [hereinafter SEC Press Release].
172 Commodity Exchange Act, 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9) (2010).
173 US Futures Trading and Regulation, supra note 165.
174 See Coinflip, Inc., C.T.F.C. Docket No. 15-29 at 2 (Commodity Trading Futures
Comm’n Sept. 16, 2015) (initiation).
80
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
1. In the Matter of Coinflip
[47] Coinflip, owned and operated by Francisco Riordan, was a
Delaware corporation operating in San Francisco, California.175 Coinflip
operated a website, derivabit.com, which connected buyers and sellers of
standardized Bitcoin options and futures contracts.176 Coinflip users were
first required to register an account and deposit Bitcoin.177 After that,
Coinflip users could post bids and offers for Bitcoin options contracts or
accept other users’ Bitcoin put and call options.178 At the conclusion of an
option contract, premiums and payments of settlement were paid using
Bitcoin at a spot rate determined by a third-party Bitcoin exchange.179
Under the CEA, platforms offering futures contracts on commodities must
be registered with the CFTC as an exchange.180 The CFTC alleged that
Coinflip:
violated Sections 4c(b) and 5h(a)(l) of the Act and
Commission Regulations 32.2 and 37.3(a)(l) by conducting
activity related to commodity options contrary to
Commission Regulations and by operating a facility for the
trading or processing of swaps without being registered as a
swap execution facility or designated contract market.181
175 Id.
176 Id.
177 Id. at 3.
178 Id. at 2–3.
179 Coinflip, Inc., supra note 174.
180 Id. at 4.
181 Id. at 2.
81
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[48] Thus, in determining whether Coinflip violated the CEA and CFTC
Regulations, the sole issue was whether Bitcoin classified as a
commodity.182
[49] In the CFTC’s Order in Coinflip, the CFTC stated that “Virtual
Currencies Such as Bitcoin are Commodities[,]” and provided that:
Section 1a(9) of the Act defines "commodity" to include,
among other things, "all services, rights, and interests in
which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the
future dealt in." 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9). The definition of a
"commodity" is broad . . . Bitcoin and other virtual
currencies are encompassed in the definition and properly
defined as commodities.183
[50] In short, the CFTC relied on case law, which held that the definition
of commodity is “broad,” and concluded that Bitcoin and other virtual
currencies are properly defined as commodities.184 That is the extent of the
CFTC’s legal analysis in its Order in Coinflip.
[51] Coinflip submitted an offer to the CFTC waiving its right to a trial
and agreed to cease its operations as an unregistered swap execution
facility.185 This was the first time the CFTC characterized a cryptocurrency
as a commodity.186 However, it was a proper case for the CFTC to exert its
182 Id. at 3.
183 Id.
184 Coinflip, Inc., supra note 174.
185 Id. at 1.
186 Matt Clinch, Bitcoin now classed as a commodity in the US, CNBC,
https://www.cnbc.com/2015/09/18/bitcoin-now-classed-as-a-commodity-in-the-us.html
[https://perma.cc/DP65-V57L] (last updated Sep. 18, 2015, 3:48 PM).
82
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies because Coinflip was offering futures
contracts on Bitcoin, thus falling within the CFTC’s jurisdiction over
futures contracts dealing in “goods.”187 It was unclear whether the CFTC
would exert its jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies outside the context of
futures contracts until the CFTC charged Patrick McDonnell in 2018 for his
role with his fraudulent company, Coin Drop Markets.188
2. CFTC v. Patrick K. McDonnell and Cabbage Tech,
Corp. d/b/a Coin Drop Markets
[52] Coin Drop Markets advertised itself as a team of Wall Street crypto
trading advisors and offered membership subscriptions where members
would receive expert trading advice and investment services.189 In reality,
McDonnell was operating Coin Drop Markets alone in his Staten Island
basement, he never provided any expert crypto trading advice to his
customers, and he lied about his investing experience.190 Some members
only purchased memberships from McDonnell to receive investing
advice.191 Other investors were lured by McDonnell’s promises of 200 to
300% daily returns and thus transferred their crypto to Coin Drop
Markets.192 After receiving $290,429.29 from members,193 McDonnell
deleted Coin Drop Markets’ social media accounts and websites and ceased
187 Fast Answers: Commodity Futures Trading Commission, SEC, https://www.sec.gov/
fast-answers/answers-cftc [https://perma.cc/F6UY-TVDT] (last updated May 26, 2010).
188 CFTC v. McDonnell, No. 18-CV-361, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 146576, at *27–28
(E.D.N.Y. Aug. 23, 2018).
189 Id. at *7.
190 Id. at *8.
191 Id. at *29.
192 Id. at *31.
193 McDonnell, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 146576, at *43.
83
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
communications with investors (also known as a “rug pull” in the
cryptocurrency market).194 The CFTC alleged that Coin Drop Market
operated “a deceptive and fraudulent virtual currency scheme . . . for
purported virtual currency trading advice” and “for virtual currency
purchases and trading . . . and simply misappropriated [investor] funds.”195
[53] The CFTC filed charges against McDonnell in the United States
District Court of the Eastern District of New York, seeking a preliminary
injunction.196 McDonnell (who represented himself) filed a motion to
dismiss and argued the CFTC lacked jurisdiction over the Coin Drop
Market scheme because crypto was not a commodity.197 The court had to
decide two questions presented in order to determine whether the CFTC had
jurisdiction over McDonnell: (1) whether virtual currency may be regulated
by the CFTC as a commodity; and (2) whether the amendments to the CEA
under the Dodd-Frank Act permit the CFTC to exercise its jurisdiction over
fraud that does not directly involve the sale of futures or derivatives
contracts.198 In granting the CFTC’s preliminary injunction, the court held
that “[b]oth questions are answered in the affirmative.”199 The court began
194 Id. at *8; Rosie Perper, What Is a Rug Pull? How to Protect Yourself From Getting
‘Rugged’, COINDESK, https://www.coindesk.com/learn/what-is-a-rug-pull-how-to-
protect-yourself-from-getting-rugged/ [https://perma.cc/X549-PX36] (last updated May
11, 2023, 12:50 PM).
195 McDonnell, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 146576, at *10.
196 Press Release, CFTC, Federal Court in New York Enters Preliminary Injunction Order
against Patrick K. McDonnell and His Company CabbageTech, Corp. d/b/a Coin Drop
Markets in Connection with Fraudulent Virtual Currency Scheme (Mar. 6, 2018),
https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/7702-18 [https://perma.cc/2TNT-
LKKM].
197 See CFTC v. McDonnell, 287 F. Supp. 3d 213 (E.D.N.Y. Mar. 6, 2018).
198 Id. at 217.
199 Id.
84
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
its opinion by saying: “Until Congress clarifies the matter, the CFTC has
concurrent authority, along with other state and federal administrative
agencies . . . over dealings in virtual currency.”200
[54] In answering the first question presented, the McDonnell court relied
on the CEA’s broad definition of “commodity,”201 holding that “[a]
‘commodity’ encompasses virtual currency both in economic function and
in the language of the statute.”202 According to the court, cryptocurrencies
are “goods” exchanged in a market for a uniform quality and value, falling
within both the common definition of “commodity” and the CEA’s
definition of “commodities” as broadly encompassing “all . . . goods”203
[55] Addressing the second question presented, the court held that the
CFTC’s “broad [statutory] authority . . . extends to fraud or manipulation in
the virtual currency derivatives market and its underlying spot market[,]”204
and that the CFTC “may exercise its enforcement power over fraud related
to virtual currencies transacted in interstate commerce.”205 In the end, the
court held McDonnell liable for violating CEA § 6(c)(1) and CFTC
Regulation 180.1 for engaging in fraudulent activity in connection with
commodities.206 The CFTC obtained a judgment against McDonnell
200 Id.
201 Id.
202 McDonnell, 287 F. Supp. 3d at 217 (showing that the CEA defines “commodity” as
agricultural products and “all other goods and articles . . . and all services, rights, and
interests . . . in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt
in.”).
203 Id. at 228.
204 Id. at 217.
205 Id.
206 Id. at 234.
85
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
totaling over $1.1 million, of which $290,429.29 was awarded as restitution
as well as a civil monetary penalty of $871,287.87 (which was three times
the amount McDonnell stole from customers under the statute’s treble
damages provision).207 Further, McDonnell was permanently banned from
trading in cryptocurrencies.208
[56] The McDonnell case was the first time a federal district court held
that cryptocurrency fell under the definition of a commodity.209 As a result,
some crypto exchanges (including FTX) filed with the CFTC as required
under the Commodities Exchange Act.210 However, the SEC defined and
regulated cryptocurrencies differently.211 Before the CFTC asserted its
jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies as commodities, the SEC exerted its
jurisdiction over investment contracts dealing in cryptocurrencies.212
C. Regulating Cryptocurrencies as Securities
[57] As previously mentioned, the SEC is charged with enforcing the
Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which
207 See CFTC v. McDonnell, No. 18-CV-361, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 146576 (E.D.N.Y.
Aug. 23, 2018).
208 Id.
209 Id.
210 Press Release, Dennis M. Kelleher, CEO of Better Markets, FTX Was Registered
With and Licensed by the CFTC, Which Failed to Properly Regulate or Supervise It and
Its Innumerable Former CFTC Officials (Nov. 14, 2022), https://bettermarkets.org/
newsroom/ftx-was-registered-with-and-licensed-by-the-cftc-which-failed-to-properly-
regulate-or-supervise-it-and-its-innumerable-former-cftc-officials/
[https://perma.cc/RA27-QBGG].
211 Fast Answers: CFTC, supra note 187.
212 Isaac et al., supra note 155.
86
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
together comprise the nation’s securities laws.213 The Securities Act of 1933
defines a “security” as “any note, stock, treasury stock, security future,
security-based swap, bond . . . [or] investment contract” (emphasis
added).214 To determine whether an investment contract exists, courts apply
a four-prong inquiry called the Howey test.215
[58] In its 1946 decision in SEC v. W.J. Howey Co., the U.S. Supreme
Court held that an investment contract exists when there is: (1) an
investment of money, (2) in a common enterprise, (3) with the expectation
of profit, and (4) the profit is derived from the efforts of others.216 If these
four factors are present in an agreement, the agreement constitutes an
investment contract and is subject to the SEC’s rules and regulations.217 To
consider how courts interpret the Howey test, the 2014 case SEC v. Trendon
T. Shavers and Bitcoin Savings and Trust is illustrative.218
1. SEC v. Trendon T. Shavers and Bitcoin Savings and
Trust
[59] Trendon T. Shavers solicited investments in his company, Bitcoin
Savings and Trust, promising returns of up to 1% per day or 7% weekly and
touting his own skills at trading in Bitcoin.219 Investors provided Shavers
213 Kenton, supra note 163.
214 15 U.S.C. § 77b(a)(1); SEC v. Shavers, No. 4:13-CV-416, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS
130781 (E.D. Tex. Sept. 18, 2014).
215 SEC v. W.J. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293 (1946).
216 Id. at 298.
217 Id.
218 SEC v. Shavers, No. 4:13-CV-416, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 194382, at *1 (E.D. Tex.
Aug. 26, 2014).
219 Id. at *1–2.
87
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
with a username, an email address, their investments in Bitcoin, and a
Bitcoin wallet address to receive investment withdraws.220 With his newly
obtained Bitcoin, Shavers built his own Bitcoin mining operation and left a
small reserve fund for investors withdrawing their funds.221 Soon
afterwards, Shavers reduced his promised rate of return from 7% to 3.9%
and eventually shut down his operation when too many investors withdrew
their funds at once.222 The SEC determined that Bitcoin Savings and Trust
was a Ponzi scheme.223 Of the approximately 732,100 Bitcoins investors
provided, around 180,819 Bitcoins went towards Shavers’ personal
expenses.224
[60] In response to these allegations, Shavers argued federal securities
laws did not apply to cryptocurrencies and, accordingly, that the court
lacked jurisdiction.225 The court examined Shavers’ conduct under the
Howey test and held that the investments in his company constituted
investment contracts because: (1) Bitcoin is a currency or form of money;
(2) there was a common enterprise because the investors were dependent on
Shavers’ expertise in Bitcoin markets; (3) investors expected to profit
because Shavers promised a substantial return on their investments; and (4)
the expected profits were to be derived from Shavers’ efforts.226 Thus, the
court held an investment contract existed as a matter of law between Bitcoin
Savings and Trust and its investors, and Bitcoin Savings and Trust fell
220 Id.
221 Id. at *3.
222 Id. at *5
223 Shavers, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 194382, at *2.
224 Id. at *9–10.
225 Id. at *1.
226 Id., at *3.
88
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
within the SEC’s jurisdiction.227 The court held that Shavers violated the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 because:
Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act . . . and Rule 10b-5 . . .
make it unlawful for any person, in connection with the
purchase or sale of a security, directly or indirectly, to (a)
“employ any device, scheme, or artifice to defraud”; (b)
“make an untrue statement of a material fact” or a material
omission; or (c) “engage in any act, practice, or course of
business which operates . . . as a fraud or deceit upon any
person.
[61] Further, the court held that Shavers knowingly and intentionally
operated a Ponzi scheme and made misrepresentations to investors.228
[62] The set of facts surrounding Bitcoin Savings and Trust’s fraudulent
operations provided the SEC with a perfect opportunity to exert its
jurisdiction over cryptocurrency activities. Shavers accepted Bitcoin as
investments in his fraudulent company, forming an investment contract.
Shavers was not operating an unregistered exchange dealing in “goods”
(unlike the defendant in Coinflip),229 nor was he offering subscription
services for cryptocurrency trading advice (unlike the defendant in Coin
Drop Markets).230 According to the SEC, the investment contracts in
Bitcoin Savings and Trust were formed between the investors and the
227 Id. at *22.
228 Shavers, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 194382, at *14–15.
229 Id. at *3; CFTC v. McDonnell, 287 F. Supp. 3d 213, 224, 228 (E.D.N.Y. Mar. 6,
2018).
230 Shavers, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 194382, at *1; see also McDonnell, 287 F. Supp. 3d
at 232.
89
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
company itself, but the investments were paid for in Bitcoin.231 As such,
rather than address the question of whether Bitcoin itself was a security, the
court in SEC v. Shavers held more narrowly that the SEC could regulate
investment contracts dealing in Bitcoin.232 In fact, the SEC has since
provided guidance that Bitcoin and Ether (the native token on the Ethereum
blockchain) do not constitute securities under the Howey test, which is still
being debated today.233
2. Initial Coin Offerings and the Howey Test
[63] In June 2018, the Director of the SEC’s Division of Corporation
Finance, William Hinman, spoke at a summit about cryptocurrency
regulation.234 Hinman told the crowd that Bitcoin and Ether fail the Howey
test because they both “[lack] a central third party whose efforts are a key
determining factor in the enterprise. The network[s] on which Bitcoin [and
Ether] function [are] operational and appear[] to have been decentralized
for some time, perhaps from inception.”235 In an interview with CNBC in
July 2022, current SEC chair Gary Gensler reaffirmed the SEC’s position
that Bitcoin is a commodity, yet he declined to extend that classification to
Ether.236 Commentators (and possibly Gensler himself) believe Ether may
231 Shavers, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 194382, at *2–3.
232 Id. at *22.
233 William Hinman, Dir. of Div. of Corp. Fin., Sec. Exch. Comm’n, Remarks at the
Yahoo Finance All Markets Summit: Crypto: Digital Asset Transactions: When Howey
Met Gary (Plastic), 3–4 (June 14, 2018), https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/speech-
hinman-061418 [https://perma.cc/6H5U-HVJK].
234 See id.
235 Id.
236André Beganski, SEC Chair Gensler Again Says Bitcoin Is Not a Security. What About
Ethereum?, DECRYPT (June 27, 2022), https://decrypt.co/103926/sec-chair-gensler-
bitcoin-not-security-what-about-ethereum [https://perma.cc/M8TJ-QWCA].
90
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
be considered a security because it was first offered to customers in an
Initial Coin Offering (ICO).237 An ICO is when companies offer their newly
created cryptocurrencies to the public for the first time.238 An ICO in the
crypto industry is analogous to an initial public offering in the traditional
finance industry.239
[64] As previously noted, the SEC initially took the position that Bitcoin
and Ether failed the Howey test because both cryptos operate on blockchains
that are sufficiently decentralized and thus lack a common enterprise (i.e.,
Howey’s second prong).240 However, when Ethereum first launched in
2014, the Ethereum Foundation sold over 60 million tokens in an ICO at
roughly $0.31 per coin.241 The Ethereum Foundation planned on using the
funds it raised from the ICO to continue developing the Ethereum
blockchain, and the assets were not usable or transferable until the “genesis
block” was released to the public.242 Investors purchasing the tokens during
the ICO expected a return on their purchases due to the Ethereum
Foundation’s continued development of the Ethereum blockchain.243
Consequently, when a common enterprise like the Ethereum Foundation
237 See id.
238 Jake Frankenfield, Initial Coin Offering (ICO): Coin Launch Defined, with Examples,
INVESTOPEDIA, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/initial-coin-offering-ico.asp
[https://perma.cc/G77Q-FPV4] (last updated Aug. 18, 2022).
239 See id.
240 See Hinman, supra note 233.
241 Ethereum (ETH) ICO, COINCODEX, https://coincodex.com/ico/ethereum/
[https://perma.cc/65C7-8KHD] (last visited Oct. 6, 2023).
242 Vitalik Buterin, Launching the Ether Sale, ETHEREUM FOUND. BLOG (July 22, 2014),
https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/07/22/launching-the-ether-sale [https://perma.cc/8XBM-
GZ9J].
243 See id.; see also Ethereum (ETH) ICO supra note 241.
91
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
sells its cryptocurrencies in an ICO, the cryptocurrencies may represent an
investment contract between the purchaser and the issuer.244 In contrast,
Bitcoin lacks the centralized common enterprise Ethereum has: There is no
Bitcoin foundation continuing to develop the blockchain, and the first
Bitcoin was mined by a node on the peer-to-peer, decentralized network
rather than sold directly to customers.245 Accordingly, because Bitcoin lacks
a common enterprise, it fails the Howey definition of “investment contract.”
[65] Other cryptocurrencies (e.g., XRP and ATB Coin) have also
launched through ICOs.246 In Balestra v. ATBCOIN LLC, investors in ATB
Coin’s ICO sued the company in the United States District Court of the
Southern District of New York for selling unregistered securities.247 ATB
Coin filed a motion to dismiss the suit arguing the court lacked jurisdiction
on account of its cryptocurrency failing to constitute a security, and the
motion was denied.248 The plaintiffs in the case settled with ATB Coin for
244 See generally Hinman, supra note 233 (discussing the Howey test and the broad nature
of investment contracts).
245 See Hinman, supra note 233; David Floyd, How Bitcoin Works, INVESTOPEDIA,
https://www.investopedia.com/news/how-bitcoin-works/ [https://perma.cc/85DZ-CQ9C]
(last updated Aug. 20, 2023); see e.g., Alice Ivey, Primary vs. secondary markets: Key
differences, COINTELEGRAPH (Mar. 15, 2023), https://cointelegraph.com/news/primary-
vs-secondary-markets-key-differences [https://perma.cc/Q644-HVQA]; Benedict George,
The Genesis Block: The First Bitcoin Block, NASDAQ (Jan. 3, 2023, 11:03 AM),
https://nasdaq.com/articles/the-genesis-block:-the-first-bitcoin-block
[https://perma.cc/T9XC-2WMC].
246 See SEC Press Release, supra note 171; Press Release, Cointelegraph, ATB Coin
Cryptocurrency ICO Now Underway Across Globe, (June 15, 2017),
https://cointelegraph.com/press-releases/atb-coin-cryptocurrency-ico-now-underway-
across-globe [https://perma.cc/7S59-665X].
247 Balestra v. ATBCOIN, LLC, 380 F. Supp. 3d 340, 346–47 (S.D.N.Y Mar. 31, 2019).
248 Id. at 346.
92
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
$250,000,249 but the fact the court denied ATB Coin’s motion to dismiss
indicated it was plausible cryptocurrencies sold through ICOs constitute
securities.250 On its part, the SEC asserted that cryptocurrencies, including
those offered through an ICO, constitute securities after it charged Ripple
Labs Inc. for selling its cryptocurrency, XRP.251
3. SEC v. Ripple Labs, Inc.
[66] In its filing against Ripple Labs, the SEC alleged that Ripple Labs
engaged in three types of unregistered XRP offers and sales: (1)
“Institutional Sales” to sophisticated buyers (such as hedge funds) under
written contracts amounting to $728 million; (2) “Programmatic Sales,”
which were $757 million in public sales to public buyers on digital asset
exchanges; and (3) “Other Distributions,” which reference $609 million
worth of XRP distributions to employees as compensation and to third
parties to develop new applications for XRP.252 Further, the SEC alleged
Ripple Labs’ former CEO, Christian Larsen, and current CEO, Bradley
Garlinghouse, engaged in the unregistered sale of securities in their
individual capacities on digital asset exchanges.253 And lastly, the SEC also
alleged that Larsen and Garlinghouse aided and abetted Ripple’s Section 5
violations.254
249 Samuel Haig, Lead Plaintiff Settles Class Action Targeting $20 Min ICO for
$250,000, COINTELEGRAPH (Apr. 12, 2020), https://cointelegraph.com/news/lead-
plaintiff-settles-class-action-targeting-20-mln-ico-for-250-000 [https://perma.cc/MZW3-
TETX].
250 Balestra v. ATBCOIN, LLC, 380 F. Supp. 3d 340, 351 (S.D.N.Y Mar. 31, 2019).
251 SEC Press Release, supra note 171.
252 SEC v. Ripple Labs, Inc., No. 1:20-CV-10832, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486
(S.D.N.Y. July 13, 2023).
253 Id.
254 Id.
93
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[67] Ripple Labs responded to the allegations by making a nuanced
argument, asserting that XRP failed to constitute a security under the Howey
test because it lacked the “essential ingredients.”255 According to Ripple
Labs, every investment contract case prior to 1933 involved an actual
contract, imposed post-sale obligations on the promoter, and gave the
investor a right to receive profits (the “essential ingredients”).256 Ripple
Labs argued these characteristics do not apply to XRP and no Supreme
Court or Second Circuit Court of Appeals case since Howey has held that
an investment contract exists without these three essential characteristics.257
Ripple Labs—and Larsen and Garlinghouse—also raised a fair notice
defense under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth and Fifth
Amendments to the U.S. Constitution, which requires the language of
criminal statutes be sufficiently clear to objectively give fair notice of what
is prohibited.258 Nevertheless, the main issue was whether Ripple Labs’
XRP transactions constituted investment contracts under the Howey test.
[68] On July 13, 2023, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District
of New York issued its much anticipated order in response to the cross-
motions for summary judgment, granting and denying both motions in
part.259 The court rejected Ripple Labs’ “essential ingredients” analysis, and
instead applied the three-prong version of the Howey test to each type of
transaction at issue.260
255 Def.’s Reply Supp. Mot. Summ. J. at 13.
256 Ripple Labs, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *20.
257 Def.’s Reply Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 6–7.
258 Ripple Labs, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *43.
259 Id.
260 Id. at *11–*19.
94
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[69] Under the three-prong version of the Howey test, an investment
contract is “a contract, transaction[,] or scheme whereby a person [(1)]
invests his money [(2)] in a common enterprise and (3) is led to expect
profits solely from the efforts of the promoter or a third party.”261 The first
prong merely requires a payment by someone to “provide capital” or “put
up their money.”262 The second prong requires the invested capital to be
pooled together, such that the investors and enterprise share risk, and that
the “fortunes of each investor are tied to the fortunes of other investors, as
well as to the success of the overall enterprise.”263 Under the third prong,
the court analyzes communications made to investors to determine whether
they would reasonably expect to profit from the enterprise’s efforts.264
[70] After considering the “economic reality and totality of
circumstances surrounding the offers and sales of the underlying asset[,]”265
the court concluded the Institutional Sales constituted investment contracts,
while the Programmatic Sales and Other Transactions did not.266
[71] The court first concluded that Ripple Labs’ offers and sales of XRP
to Institutional Buyers constituted investment contracts.267 As to the first
prong, the court held that the institutional buyers’ payments in fiat and other
currencies in exchange for XRP constituted an investment, regardless of
261 Id. at *18.
262 Id.
263 Ripple Labs, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *26–*27.
264 Id. at *19.
265 Id. at *22.
266 Id. at *35, *39, *41.
267 Id. at *35.
95
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
whether the Institutional Buyers had an intent to make an investment.268
Under the second prong of the Howey test, a common enterprise existed due
to Ripple Labs’ conduct after the sales: Ripple Labs pooled its investors’
assets together by failing to segregate and separately manage investor funds,
and Ripple Labs’ success was tied to the Institutional Buyers’ profits.269
And third, the court held that the Institutional Buyers had a reasonable
expectation of profits to be derived from Ripple’s efforts based off Ripple’s
communications, which involved a marketing campaign for Institutional
Buyers and quarterly market reports touting XRP’s potential value.270 By
satisfying all three prongs of the Howey test, “Ripple’s Institutional Sales
of XRP constituted the unregistered offer and sale of investment contracts
in violation of Section 5 of the Securities Act.”271
[72] The court next examined Ripple’s “Programmatic Sales” of XRP
and held that these sales failed to constitute investment contracts under the
third prong of the Howey test.272 The Programmatic Sales were blind bid/ask
transactions on digital asset exchanges. In conducting its Programmatic
Sales, “Ripple did not make any promises or offers because Ripple did not
know who was buying the XRP, and the purchasers did not know who was
selling it.”273 According to the court, even if these investors expected to
profit off their investments, such buyers “could not have known if their
payments of money went to Ripple, or any other seller of XRP.”274 In this
268 Ripple Labs, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *26.
269 Id. at *27–*28.
270 Id. at *30–*31.
271 Id. at *35.
272 Id.
273 Ripple Labs, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *37.
274 Id. at *35–*36.
96
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
blind, bid/ask transaction context, “the economic reality is that a
Programmatic Buyer stood in the same shoes as a secondary market
purchaser who did not know to whom or what it was paying its money.”275
Thus, the buyers could not reasonably expect for Ripple to use any capital
it received to improve the XRP network—thereby increasing the XRP price.
And even if some Programmatic Buyers reasonably expected to derive
profit from Ripple’s efforts, “[t]he inquiry is an objective one focusing on
the promises and offers made to investors; it is not a search for the precise
motivation of each individual participant.”276 In short, the Programmatic
Sales failed to constitute investment contracts under the third prong of the
Howey test.
[73] The $609 million worth of “Other Transactions,” which was Ripple
Labs’ book value for the XRP it paid to employees and third parties, also
failed to constitute investment contracts.277 These payments failed under the
first prong of the Howey test, which requires a payment of money.278 The
SEC argued these payments constituted an indirect public offering because
the parties receiving XRP in these Other Transactions were free to transfer
their XRP to another holder.279 Nevertheless, the court rejected this
argument because “the payment of money for these XRP sales never traced
back to Ripple, and the Court cannot make such a finding.”280 As a result,
275 Id. at *36.
276 Id. at *37.
277 Id. at *39–*40.
278 Ripple Labs, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *40.
279 Id. at *41.
280 Id.
97
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
“Ripple’s Other Distributions did not constitute the offer and sale of
investment contracts.”281
[74] Lastly, the court applied the Howey test to the XRP sales made by
Ripple Labs CEOs, Larsen and Garlinghouse, in their individual
capacities.282 From 2013 to 2020, Larsen sold $450 million worth of XRP
he retained after founding the XRP blockchain. Garlinghouse sold $150
million worth of XRP from 2017 to 2020, some of which was earned as
compensation.283 The court concluded that these sales failed under the third
Howey prong, like the Programmatic Sales.284 These sales were conducted
on various digital asset exchanges in blind bid/ask transactions—Larsen and
Garlinghouse did not know to whom they sold the XRP, and the buyers did
not know the identity of the seller.285 “Thus, as a matter of law, the record
cannot establish the third Howey prong as to these transactions.”286
[75] In sum, the court concluded Ripple’s sales to Institutional Buyers
constituted investment contracts, while neither the Other Transactions nor
any of the defendants’ sales on digital asset exchanges constituted
investment contracts.287
[76] The court rejected the defendants’ fair notice defense as to the
Institutional Sales and denied both parties’ motions for summary judgment
281 Id.
282 Id. at *41–*42.
283 Ripple Labs, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *10.
284 Id.
285 Id. at *42.
286 Id.
287 Id. at *35, *39, *41.
98
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
as to the aiding and abetting charges against Larsen and Garlinghouse.288
On October 19, 2023, the SEC stipulated and agreed to dismiss the aiding
and abetting claims against Garlinghouse and Larsen, which Ripple’s Chief
Legal Officer described as a “surrender by the SEC.”289 The SEC will likely
appeal, but the Ripple Labs decision was viewed as a huge win in the crypto
industry.
[77] The Ripple Labs decision seemed to give a clear answer that
cryptocurrencies sold through ICOs constitute investment contracts,
whereas cryptocurrencies sold through digital asset exchanges do not. This
clarity was short-lived, however. The SEC filed for an interlocutory appeal,
and in denying the SEC’s motion, the Ripple Labs court asserted that the
SEC misconstrued her holding to mean “offers and sales on crypto asset
trading platforms cannot create a reasonable expectation of profits based on
the efforts of others[.]”290 Judge Torres made clear that her rulings applied
only in the Ripple case because they were based on "the totality of the
circumstances . . . , including an examination of the facts, circumstances,
and economic realities of the transactions[.]”291
[78] Thus, the Ripple Labs decision can be properly read as requiring
judges to examine the facts, circumstances, and economic realities of the
transactions to determine whether a cryptocurrency is a security, a
commodity, or neither.292 This judge-made line drawing fails to provide
288 Ripple Labs, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *44, *46.
289 Katherine Ross, No trial: SEC moves to dismiss charges against Ripple’s
Garlinghouse, Larsen, BLOCKWORKS (Oct. 19, 2023 at 5:32 PM), https://blockworks.co/
news/sec-drops-dismisses-garlinghouse-case [https://perma.cc/Y3VT-H96V].
290 SEC v. Ripple Labs, Inc., No. 1:20-CV-10832, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 178300 at
*12–*13 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 3, 2023).
291 Id. at *13.
292 Id.
99
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
clear guidance to those in the cryptocurrency industry, especially when
judges in the same district as the Ripple Labs court have declined to follow
the decision.293 All the while, the SEC and CFTC have continued to assert
their jurisdiction over cryptocurrency exchanges, including against
Coinbase and Binance.294 Congressional action is needed.
4. Current Congressional Efforts
[79] The 118th Congress have introduced a number of bills on
cryptocurrency, but there are two main pieces of legislation this paper will
cover: the Financial Innovation and Technology for the 21st Century Act,295
and the Lummis-Gillibrand Responsible Financial Innovation Act.296
a. The Financial Innovation and Technology for
the 21st Century Act
[80] The Financial Innovation and Technology for the 21st Century Act
(the “FIT Act”) was introduced on July 20, 2023 by Representatives Glenn
293 Toby Galloway & Jamie Lacy, Federal Court in Terraform Labs Rejects Ripple
Decision, JDSUPRA (Aug. 1, 2023), https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/federal-court-in-
terraform-labs-rejects-9576629/ [https://perma.cc/U6XS-YRY6].
294 Press Release, SEC, SEC Charges Coinbase for Operating as an Unregistered
Securities Exchange, Broker, and Clearing Agency (June 6, 2023), https://www.sec.gov/
news/press-release/2023-102 [https://perma.cc/A2K6-66D8]; Press Release, SEC, SEC
Files 13 Charges Against Binance Entities and Founder Changpeng Zhao (June 5, 2023),
https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2023-101 [https://perma.cc/JR34-JBEF].
295 See Financial Innovation and Technology of the 21st Century Act, H.R. 4763, 118th
Cong. (2023).
296 See Lummis-Gillibrand Responsible Financial Innovation Act, S. 2281, 118th Cong.
(2023).
100
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
Thompson, French Hill, and Dusty Johnson.297 The bill provides a
definition for “digital commodity”298 and establishes certain qualitative and
quantitative thresholds for a blockchain network to determine whether a
digital asset will be regulated by the SEC or the CFTC.299 The FIT Act
focuses on two key principles, functionality and decentralization, “[t]o
clarify how the Supreme Court’s Howey Test applies to digital assets.”300
[81] The FIT Act provides the CFTC with primary jurisdiction over
digital assets and digital asset markets.301 When a blockchain network is
both “functional” and certified as “decentralized,”302 as those terms are
defined in the Act, the asset on the blockchain network constitutes a “digital
commodity.”303 Digital commodity issuers and intermediaries must register
with the CFTC.304 The SEC has jurisdiction over “Restricted Digital
Assets,” which are digital assets on blockchain networks lacking
functionality or certification of decentralization or are digital assets in the
297 Press Release, French Hill, Representative, Reps. Hill, Thompson, Johnson Introduce
Financial Innovation and Technology for the 21st Century Act (July 20, 2023),
https://hill.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=9157
[https://perma.cc/E958-QNY2].
298 See H.R. 4763. at § 101.
299 Id.
300 Press Release, H. Fin. Servs. Comm., McHenry Delivers Opening Remarks at Historic
Markup of Comprehensive Digital Asset Market Structure Legislation (July 26, 2023),
https://financialservices.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=408928#:~:t
ext=%E2%80%9CTo%20clarify%20how%20the%20Supreme,not%20developed%20in
%20a%20vacuum [https://perma.cc/VX6B-3DZ4].
301 See H.R. 4763.
302 Id. at § 101.
303 Id.
304 Id. at § 404.
101
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
hands of its issuer.305 Thus, the determining factors in applying the FIT
Act’s regulatory scheme to digital assets are functionality and
decentralization. As explained below, functionality examines whether the
blockchain operates, while decentralization focuses on digital asset
ownership and control over the blockchain, among other things.306
[82] A “functional network” is a blockchain network that allows
participants to either (i) use its network to transmit and store value on the
blockchain, (ii) participate in services or applications on the network, or (iii)
participate in the decentralized governance of the blockchain system.307
Thus, for commodity treatment, a blockchain network must have some
functionality in terms of currency, operate services or applications, or
provide voting rights.308 After constituting a functional network, the digital
asset must also be on a “decentralized network,”309 as defined below.
[83] Under the FIT Act, a “decentralized network”310 is a blockchain
network where:
(i) during the 12-months prior to issuance, no person had
the unilateral authority to control or materially alter the
functionality or operation of the blockchain system;
(ii) no digital asset issuer or affiliated person (relates to
ownership) beneficially owned, in the aggregate,
305 Id. at §§ 101, 301.
306 See H.R. 4763, at § 101.
307 Id.
308 Id.
309 Id.
310 Id. at § 101.
102
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
20% or more of the total amount of units of such
digital asset or had the ability to do so;
(iii) during the 3-month period prior to issuance, the digital
asset issuer or any related person has not altered the
blockchain’s source code, unless to address
vulnerabilities or adopted through consensus (consensus
is when token holders approve a software update through
a decentralized governance system);
(iv) during the 3-month period prior to issuance, neither any
digital asset issuer nor any affiliated person has marketed
to the public the digital assets as an investment (focusing
on communications made to the public by the enterprise
or any affiliated persons); and
(v) during the previous 12-month period, all issuances of
units of such digital asset through the programmatic
functioning of the blockchain system were end user
distributions (end user distributions are issuances
involving no money for consideration and are incentive-
based; air drops and staking and mining rewards would
presumably be end user distributions).311
[84] In toto: the “decentralized network” definition: (i) examines whether
someone has unilateral control over the blockchain network’s operability,
(ii) establishes ownership thresholds for issuers and affiliated people, (iii)
disallows the digital asset issuer or its employees changing the network’s
code within three months prior to issuance (with exceptions), (iv) disallows
the issuer or any affiliated person to market the asset as an investment for
three months before issuance, and (v) permits programmatic issuance
through end user distributions, which are presumably air drops and staking
311 See H.R. 4763, at § 101.
103
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
and mining rewards.312 Once a blockchain network is decentralized, a
person can file the certification of decentralization.313
[85] The FIT Act permits digital asset issuers to file a certification of
decentralization with either the CFTC or the SEC.314 But the Act makes it
unlawful to act as a digital commodity broker or dealer without registering
with the CFTC, and imposes registration requirements similar to existing
securities laws if the asset is a restricted digital asset.315 In line with the
definition of “decentralized network,” the certification of decentralization
details the blockchain network’s activities, development history, and
ownership.316 After a certification of decentralization is filed, the SEC has
thirty days to rebut a certification if they determine the blockchain system
is not a decentralized network.317 The CFTC has twenty business days to do
so (or two days if an intermediary is filing for an asset on a network with
certification of decentralization).318 If these deadlines are passed and neither
commission raises an objection, then the filing becomes effective with the
CFTC,319 and the SEC considers the network a decentralized network.320
312 Id.
313 Id. at §§ 204, 403–04.
314 Id. at §§ 204, 403.
315 Id. at §§ 303, 305, 403–04.
316 See H.R. 4763, at §§ 204, 403.
317 Id. at § 204.
318 Id. at § 403.
319 Id.
320 Id. at § 204.
104
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[86] The FIT Act grants the SEC and CFTC broad discretion in
determining how frequently—and to what extent—they will require
reporting from digital asset brokers and dealers, and from digital
commodity brokers and dealers.321 Digital asset brokers and dealers, as well
as digital commodity brokers and dealers, are required to “meet such
minimum capital requirements as the Commission may prescribe to ensure”
the broker or dealer is able to, at all times, fulfill its customers’
obligations.322 The reporting requirements’ frequency and intensity are left
up to the commissions, but the commissions can require any information
they consider necessary, and the digital asset issuers and intermediaries
must make continued reporting “as the Commission may require.”323
Further, the FIT Act requires any intermediary dealing in customer’s
restricted digital assets or digital commodities to hold such assets with a
qualified custodian, such as a bank.324
[87] The FIT Act’s principles in determining whether the SEC and/or the
CFTC should have jurisdiction over a digital asset utilizes similar rationale
to the court’s holding in Ripple Labs. In theory, if a blockchain network is
functional, people purchasing digital assets on the blockchain could
purchase the asset to participate in the blockchain system, rather than with
an expectation to earn a profit. And even if someone reasonably expected
to profit from their purchase, if the blockchain is decentralized, the
speculative investor cannot reasonably expect to derive their profit from the
efforts of an ongoing common enterprise.325 Further, end user distributions
321 See H.R. 4763, at §§ 306, 401.
322 Id. at §§ 306, 406.
323 Id.
324 Id. at §§ 304, 306, 406.
325 Id. at § 101.
105
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
are transactions without money, so these issuances would fail under the first
prong of the Howey test.326
[88] Although the rationale is similar, applying the FIT Act to the facts
in Ripple Labs would produce a much different result. First, the XRP sold
in the Institutional Sales would constitute restricted digital assets under FIT
because the Ripple Labs founders retained 20 billion out of the 100 billion
(20%) XRP supply,327 so the network lacked decentralization under the FIT
Act.328 The XRP sold through Programmatic Sales—the transactions
conducted on crypto exchanges—would constitute restricted digital assets
due to the lack of decentralization, but FIT provides a path to obtaining
commodity treatment: functionality, decentralization, and certification of
decentralization.329 The XRP paid to employees in the Other Distributions
would constitute restricted digital assets because the employees and third
parties receiving the XRP constitute related persons under the FIT Act.330
But, under the FIT Act, the XRP would constitute a restricted asset only for
twelve months after receiving the asset, or whenever the XRP Ledger
achieves functionality and certification of decentralization.331 And lastly,
only some of the XRP Garlinghouse and Larsen sold would constitute
restricted digital assets due to lack of decentralization: after retaining 20%
of the XRP supply, the aggregate ownership between affiliated persons
presumably fell below 20% after the first wave of sales. Under the FIT Act,
Ripple would need to register with the SEC to dispossess any XRP through
326 SEC v. Ripple Labs, Inc., No. 1:20-CV-10832, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486, at *41
(S.D.N.Y. July 13, 2023).
327 Id. at *6–*7.
328 See H.R. 4763, at § 101.
329 Id.
330 Id.
331 Id.
106
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
sales or as compensation, or achieve functionality and certification of
decentralization and register with the CFTC.332
[89] The FIT Act also contemplates situations when a single
intermediary deals in restricted digital assets and digital commodities.
Section 105 of the FIT Act directs the SEC and CFTC to issue joint
rulemakings to prevent duplicative or unduly burdensome reporting
requirements.333 Further, Section 503 establishes a CFTC-SEC Joint
Advisory Committee on Digital Assets, which would be responsible for
issuing rules and regulations to further the regulatory harmonization
between the two Commissions.334
[90] The FIT Act is effective in giving objective measures to determine
whether a digital asset is regulated by the CFTC or the SEC, rather than
applying the Howey test to each transaction. It is a comprehensive bill and,
on top of providing a clear regulatory framework, it imposes registration
and reporting requirements on crypto intermediaries, as well as capital
requirements.335 With the reporting and capital requirements, the FIT Act
grants the CFTC and SEC with discretion in what to impose.336 Further, the
FIT Act provides several opportunities for the SEC and CFTC to work
332 Id.
333 H.R. 4763, at § 105.
334 See id. at § 503.
335 See e.g., id.
336 Id.
107
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
together to ensure the regulatory system is not unduly burdensome. Despite
its positive traits, the bill is not without criticisms.337
[91] In the Financial Services Committee’s markup meeting for the FIT
Act, Representative Maxine Waters claimed the bill creates more confusion
than provides clarity and offers fewer protections to consumers and
investors than the existing securities laws.338 Representative Waters
described the bill as “the wish-list of big crypto” and “undeserving of any
of our support.”339 Nevertheless, on July 26, 2023, the Financial Services
Committee passed the FIT Act out of Committee, which is the first time a
crypto-focused regulatory Act has been voted out of any committee in the
House or Senate.340 Next, the FIT Act will go to the House Floor for debate.
[92] In the Senate wing of the Capitol Building, Senators Lummis and
Gillibrand have introduced the Responsible Financial Innovation Act
(RFIA).341
337 Victor Alexander, FIT Crypto Bill Criticized by Democrats, INSIDE BITCOINS (July 28,
2023), https://insidebitcoins.com/news/fit-crypto-bill-criticized [https://perma.cc/X6KM-
N6SB]; Victor Alexander, House Bill May Endanger Crypto Prospects and Strengthen
the SEC, INSIDE BITCOINS (July 23, 2023), https://insidebitcoins.com/news/house-bill-
may-endanger-crypto-prospects-and-strengthen-the-sec [https://perma.cc/C94H-G4CX].
338 Press Release, H. Fin. Servs. Comm., Ranking Member Waters Delivers Opening
Statement at Full Committee Markup (July 26, 2023), https://democrats-
financialservices.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=410718
[https://perma.cc/A6ML-ZNU6].
339 Id.
340 Kristin Smith, The FIT Act Is the Most Comprehensive Crypto Regulation Ever Voted
on by Congress, COINDESK (Aug. 16, 2023, 7:00 AM), https://www.coindesk.com/
consensus-magazine/2023/08/16/the-fit-act-is-the-most-comprehensive-crypto-
regulation-ever-voted-on-by-congress/ [https://perma.cc/YXJ6-YB44].
341 Lummis-Gillibrand Responsible Financial Innovation Act, S. 2281, 118th Cong.
(2023).
108
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
b. The Responsible Financial Innovation Act
[93] Last year, during the 117th Congressional session, Senators Lummis
and Gillibrand introduced the RFIA.342 The Senators reintroduced the RFIA
this year with several changes to the previous version,343 but the main
regulatory scheme between the SEC and the CFTC remains the same: The
CFTC will have jurisdiction over “crypto assets” and “crypto asset
exchanges,” while the SEC retains its jurisdiction over securities.344
[94] The RFIA grants the CFTC with primary jurisdiction over crypto
assets, crypto asset exchanges, and crypto asset transactions.345 All crypto
asset exchanges must register with the CFTC as such.346 The RFIA attempts
to make a clear distinction between assets that are commodities or securities
by examining the rights or powers conveyed to customers.347 Specifically,
if a digital asset provides its holder with a debt or equity interest, liquidation
rights, a right to a dividend payment, or other financial interest in a business
342 Lummis-Gillibrand Responsible Financial Innovation Act, S. 4356, 117th Cong.
(2022).
343 Press Release, Kirsten Gillibrand, Senator, Lummis, Gillibrand Reintroduce
Comprehensive Legislation To Create Regulatory Framework For Crypto Assets (July
12, 2023), https://www.lummis.senate.gov/wp-content/uploads/Whats-New-in-Lummis-
Gillibrand-2023-Final.pdf [https://perma.cc/59AN-FSNB] [hereinafter Press Release,
Gillibrand] (click on “here” after “For a look at what’s new in this version of the bill” at
the bottom of the page).
344 S. 2281, at §§ 403–04.
345 Id. at § 501.
346 Id. at § 404.
347 Id.
109
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
entity, the asset would be subject to the SEC’s jurisdiction.348 The RFIA
considers situations when cryptocurrencies are “ancillary assets,” which is
when cryptocurrency is issued to a purchaser under an investment
contract.349 When a cryptocurrency is provided to a purchaser under an
investment contract as an ancillary asset, the ancillary asset itself is not
necessarily a security.350 The CFTC would have jurisdiction over ancillary
assets that fall within its definition of digital asset, but the Bill also imposes
disclosure requirements on issuers of such ancillary assets and gives the
SEC jurisdiction over the disclosure requirements.351
[95] While it appears to be a relatively straightforward regulatory regime,
the RFIA also “[c]odifies the existing Howey test, as interpreted by the
Federal courts over the last eighty years.”352 The differing results from
applying the Howey test to cryptocurrencies is one of the main reasons why
clear regulation was so necessary.
[96] The RFIA falls short of providing the ideal regulatory clarity
investors and developers seek because there remains ambiguity in
determining whether an asset is a commodity, a security, or an ancillary
asset. However, in situations involving both an investment contract and an
348 Lummis-Gillibrand Responsible Financial Innovation Act: An Overview of New
Provisions in the Reintroduced Bill, GIBSON DUNN (Aug. 22, 2023),
https://www.gibsondunn.com/lummis-gillibrand-responsible-financial-innovation-act-an-
overview-of-new-provisions-in-the-reintroduced-bill/ [https://perma.cc/G4LZ-JP4L].
349 Press Release, Gillibrand, supra note 343 (click on “here” after “For a section by
section of the bill” at the bottom of the page).
350 S. 228, at § 501.
351 Id.
352 Press Release, Gillibrand, supra note 343 (click on “here” after “For a section by
section of the bill” at the bottom of the page).
110
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
ancillary asset, the CFTC would have jurisdiction over the asset, while the
SEC would have jurisdiction over the issuer’s reporting requirements.353
[97] The previous version of the RFIA tasked the CFTC and SEC with
studying, reporting, and developing a proposal for a new self-regulatory
organization (SRO) between the two agencies to oversee cryptocurrency
markets.354 According to Senator Gillibrand, an SRO between the two
organizations “can play a complementary role, working with regulators to
allow them to be more nimble and efficient, while maintaining strong
supervision.”355 Although Senator Lummis’s press release fails to address
the lack of a SRO in the new RFIA,356 this new version creates an Advisory
Committee on Financial Innovation, which will study and report to
regulators any evolutions in the crypto asset market.357
[98] If the RFIA is passed, it would codify the existing issue with the
United States’ current regulatory scheme: attempting to apply the Howey
test to assets without clear, objective measures to determine whether a
cryptocurrency is a commodity, a security, or something entirely different.
Nonetheless, even if the CFTC has original jurisdiction over all
cryptocurrencies, it is unlikely the CFTC can effectively oversee the
353 S. 2281, at § 501.
354 See Press Release, Kirsten Gillibrand, Senator, Lummis, Gillibrand Introduce
Landmark Legislation to Create Regulatory Framework for Digital Assets (June 7, 2022),
https://www.gillibrand.senate.gov/news/press/release/lummis-gillibrand-introduce-
landmark-legislation-to-create-regulatory-framework-for-digital-assets/
[https://perma.cc/PR3C-TFM6].
355 Id.
356 Id.
357 S. 2281, at § 908.
111
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
cryptocurrency markets due to its lack of resources.358 “The CFTC was
underfunded when I was there,” according to former CFTC Chair Timothy
Massad, who claimed the CFTC “didn’t have the resources to do things that
we really needed to do.”359 FTX was a registered exchange with the CFTC,
for example, and the CFTC failed to proactively protect investors against
FTX’s fraudulent activity.360
[99] The RFIA is not without merit, though, especially in the consumer
protection realm. Both bills require crypto exchanges to have a Chief
Compliance Officer and to institute risk management functions.361 The
RFIA goes a step further by requiring crypto intermediaries to maintain
proof of reserves and undergo an annual verification.362 Under the RFIA,
auditors would go through an exchange’s total balance of customer assets
and ensure the exchanges have an equal (or greater) amount of assets to
cover all potential customer withdrawals.363 Requiring proof of reserves on
358 Fran Velasquez, Former CFTC Chair: Here’s How SEC and CFTC Can Work
Together to Regulate Crypto, COINDESK,
https://www.coindesk.com/policy/2022/08/22/former-cftc-chair-heres-how-sec-and-cftc-
can-work-together-to-regulate-crypto/ [https://perma.cc/MV54-L83E] (last updated May
11, 2023, 2:39 PM).
359 Id.
360 Dennis M. Kelleher, Crypto, FTX, Sam Bankman-Fried, SEC, CFTC, Banking
Regulators and the Revolving Door, BETTER MARKETS, 6 (Mar. 8, 2023),
https://bettermarkets.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Better_Markets_FTX_
FactSheet.pdf [https://perma.cc/JAK5-K4AN].
361 See S. 2281, at § 404; Financial Innovation and Technology of the 21st Century Act,
H.R. 4763, 118th Cong. (2023), at §§ 404, 406.
362 S. 2281, at § 203.
363 Id. at § 404.
112
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
an annual basis is a secure and transparent way to ensure customer funds
are safe, and arguably could have prevented the FTX scandal.364
[100] In sum, some cryptocurrencies fall under the broad definition of
commodities, and the CFTC has exerted its jurisdiction over
cryptocurrencies when there are futures contracts or fraud involved. The
SEC believes most cryptocurrencies (besides Bitcoin) constitute securities.
There are two pieces of legislation introduced in Congress that would grant
the CFTC with main jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies but retain the SEC’s
jurisdiction over digital assets in certain circumstances.365 The RFIA
utilizes the existing Howey test to determine whether a cryptocurrency
constitutes a security, while the FIT Act provides quantitative and
qualitative measures to determine whether a digital asset constitutes a
digital commodity or a restricted digital asset.
[101] While the next section discusses how cryptocurrencies are taxed,
Section V will offer suggestions on how the U.S. should regulate the
cryptocurrency industry in the future.
IV. HOW THE UNITED STATES TAXES CRYPTOCURRENCY
[102] Although Bitcoin was created in 2009, cryptocurrency investors had
to wait until 2014 before the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) provided any
guidance on how cryptocurrency would be taxed.366 The IRS released
Notice 2014-21, which provided—most importantly—that cryptocurrencies
are taxed as “property,” and that cryptocurrency earned from mining on a
364 Frederick Munawa, ‘Proof of Reserves’ Emerges as a Favored Way to Prevent
Another FTX, COINDESK (Nov. 17, 2022 at 4:58 PM), https://www.coindesk.com/
tech/2022/11/17/proof-of-reserves-emerges-as-a-favored-way-to-prevent-another-
ftx/#:~:text=If%20in%20place%20at%20FTX,Fried's%20trading%20firm%20Alameda%
20Research) [https://perma.cc/P344-HNXA].
365 See e.g., S. 2281; H.R. 4763.
366 I.R.S. Notice 2014-21, 2014-1 C.B. 938.
113
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
PoW blockchain is includible in a taxpayer’s gross income.367 As discussed
below, treating cryptocurrency as property for federal income taxation
purposes results in a double-taxation that other currencies are not subject
to.368 The IRS has recently increased its focus on preventing tax evasion
through cryptocurrency.369 However, many substantive questions remain on
how the United States will tax certain cryptocurrency activities.
A. IRS Notice 2014-21
[103] IRS Notice 2014-21 announced to United States taxpayers that
“convertible” virtual currencies (virtual currencies that have an equivalent
value in real currency) are considered “property” for federal income tax
purposes.370 The IRS listed Bitcoin as an example of a convertible virtual
currency, while Ethereum (ETH) and Ripple (XRP) would also classify as
convertible virtual currencies.371 Under federal tax law, taxing an asset as
“property” means the asset is given capital treatment, like a security.372
Cryptocurrency holders in the United States must find their basis in the asset
when they acquire it, which is the cost of acquiring the cryptocurrency.
When cryptocurrency is sold or otherwise dispossessed, taxpayers must
calculate their capital gains or losses.373
367 Id.
368 See id.
369 Press Release, U.S. Dep’t of the Treasury, IRS Release Proposed Regulations on Sales
and Exchanges of Digital Assets by Brokers (Aug. 25, 2023), https://home.treasury.gov/
news/press-releases/jy1705 [https://perma.cc/7YB8-FCQZ].
370 I.R.S. Notice 2014-21, 2014-1 C.B. 938.
371 Id.
372 26 U.S.C. § 1221.
373 26 U.S.C. § 1001.
114
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
1. Taxing “Property”
[104] Because cryptocurrencies are treated as property for tax purposes,
crypto is subject to capital gains and losses rules.374 When someone trades,
sells, or otherwise dispossesses cryptocurrency, they must calculate their
capital gains or losses realized on the exchange by subtracting their basis in
the property from their amount realized.375 Taxpayers can deduct up to
$3,000 of capital losses against their ordinary income, and losses in excess
of $3,000 can be offset only against any capital gains the taxpayer
recognized.376 If a taxpayer lacks capital gains to offset the capital losses in
excess of $3,000, the capital losses must be carried over to the next taxable
year.377
[105] To illustrate how “property” is taxed, consider an individual who
purchased 1,000 ADA on October 25, 2019, when ADA was $.40 each.378
The individual would have a $400 basis in their ADA, plus any transaction
fees paid to acquire the ADA. If the individual sold their 1,000 ADA on
August 28, 2021, when ADA was $2.85 per coin,379 the transaction would
result in a $2,450 capital gain (as calculating gain is determined by
subtracting the adjusted basis of $400 from the amount realized of $2,850
to get a $2,450 gain). The taxpayer’s $2,450 gain would be taxed at the
374 Id.
375 Id.
376 26 U.S.C. § 1211.
377 26 U.S.C. § 1212(b).
378 Cardano price, COINMARKETCAP, https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/cardano/
[https://perma.cc/RV4V-56BC] (last visited Oct. 1, 2023).
379 Id.
115
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
preferential, long-term capital gain rate because the individual held the
ADA for over one year.380
a. Paying for Services with “Property”
[106] If a taxpayer receives cryptocurrency for providing services or
selling goods, then the fair market value of the cryptocurrency received is
includable in the taxpayer’s reportable gross income.381 This is the same
outcome as when a taxpayer is compensated for goods or services with
United States dollars; however, because cryptocurrency is taxed as
property, taxpayers must also calculate their basis in the cryptocurrency.382
The taxpayer’s basis in the cryptocurrency is the fair market value of the
cryptocurrency when they receive it.383 This is the same outcome as when
someone is paid for services with shares in a company.384
[107] To illustrate: consider a tutor who charges $20 per hour and accepts
ADA as a form of payment. Further, imagine that the tutor has agreed to
give four hours of lessons to our 1,000 ADA investor, beginning on August
28, 2021. The investor prepays for the lessons at the current fair market
value of $2.85 per ADA,385 which amounts to 28.07 ADA, for the lessons
worth $80 USD. First, the investor dispossessed 28.07 ADA, which
380 26 U.S.C. § 1222.
381 I.R.S. Notice 2014-21, 2014-16 I.R.B. 938–39.
382 Id.
383 Id. at 938.
384 Int'l Freighting Corp. v. Comm'r of Internal Revenue, 135 F.2d 310, 313 (2d Cir.
1943).
385 See generally 26 C.F.R. § 1.61-6 (2023) (applying the general rule of gains derived
from dealings in property to a hypothetical example); Cardano price, supra note 378.
116
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
constitutes a recognition event under I.R.C. § 1001(a),386 and had an amount
realized of $80 USD. The investor’s $400 basis in the 1,000 ADA must be
equally apportioned to the 28.07 ADA transferred to the tutor.387 The
investor’s equally apportioned basis in the 28.07 ADA would be $11.23,
and the investor thus realized a gain of $68.77 on the transaction.388 The
investor would have to recognize $68.77 in capital gains on their tax returns
and would retain $388.77 of their basis in the 971.93 ADA remaining in
their wallet.389
[108] The IRS taxes cryptocurrencies like a security rather than a
currency, and the resulting complexities and tax consequences underlying a
simple transaction disincentivize cryptocurrencies’ adoption.390 Getting
paid in “property” can be equally complicated.
b. Getting Paid with “Property”
[109] This transaction between the investor and the tutor also produces
complex tax consequences to the tutor. The tutor would have to report the
$80 in ADA in their gross income as compensation earned from providing
services,391 and they would receive an $80 basis in the 28.07 ADA
386 See generally 26 U.S.C. §1001(a).
387 See generally 26 C.F.R. § 1.61-6 (2023).
388 Id.
389 See generally 26 U.S.C. §§ 1001(b)(1)–(2), 1011(a)–(b) (applying the general rule of
gains derived from dealings in property to a hypothetical example).
390 See Katherine Baer et al., Crypto Poses Significant Tax Problems–and They Could Get
Worse, IMF BLOG (July 5, 2023), https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2023/07/05/
crypto-poses-significant-tax-problems-and-they-could-get-worse [https://perma.cc/T6UJ-
VRLX].
391 See generally 26 U.S.C. § 61 (applying the definition of gross income to a
hypothetical example).
117
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
received.392 The tutor could hold onto the ADA; however, they might have
to eventually sell some to pay taxes or to pay for goods or services not
accepting ADA. If the tutor sold the 28.07 ADA on an exchange on
December 10, 2021 (when ADA was worth $1.35 per coin—$37.89 in
total),393 this would be a taxable event.394 The tutor would have an amount
realized of $37.89 on the sale, thereby yielding a short-term capital loss of
$42.11. The tutor could deduct the $42.11 in capital losses from their
ordinary income because the $42.11 is less than $3,000, the amount of
capital losses permitted to be deducted against ordinary income under
§ 1211(b).395 If the tutor had many clients paying in cryptocurrency,
however, and had capital losses exceeding the $3,000 threshold, the tutor
would be taxed on the full $80 of ADA under the higher, ordinary income
rates, even after realizing a capital loss.396
[110] If the tutor recognized a gain when selling the ADA, the tutor would
have to pay capital gains taxes on the capital gains recognized from the sale,
and the $80 in ADA would be taxed as ordinary income earned from
providing services.397 This simple transaction shows how taxing
cryptocurrency as “property” makes it impractical for cryptocurrency to be
used as an everyday currency. If the investor paid the tutor with $80 USD,
392 See generally id. at § 1011 (applying the general rule of using an adjusted basis for
determining gain or loss to a hypothetical example).
393 Cardano price, supra note 378.
394 See generally 26 U.S.C. § 1001 (applying the general rule of gains derived from
dealings in property to a hypothetical example).
395 See generally 26 U.S.C. § 1211.
396 See generally 26 U.S.C. § 61 (applying the general rule of gains derived from dealings
in property to a hypothetical example).
397 See generally §§ 61, 1001 (applying the general rule of gains derived from dealings in
property to a hypothetical example).
118
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
the tutor would have $80 in gross income, and that’s it.398 The investor and
the tutor would both bypass the additional level of taxation at the capital
gains level, even though the USD value is subject to fluctuation, too.
2. Cryptocurrency Earned from Mining
[111] Notice 2014-21 further provides that, when someone operating a
node on a PoW network successfully “mines” cryptocurrency, the fair
market value of the cryptocurrency at the time of receipt is includible in the
taxpayer’s gross income.399 For example, the aforementioned miner of
Bitcoin block #660000 received $117,370 in Bitcoin for mining the block,
and the same amount would be includible in their gross income.400 If a
taxpayer’s cryptocurrency mining activities constitute a trade or business,
the mining operation’s net earnings constitute self-employment income and
are subject to the self-employment tax.401 Some cryptocurrency miners fail
to meet the trade or business standard and thus treat their mining rewards as
ordinary income.402 Some cryptocurrency mining activities clearly
constitute a business, such as the operations run by Riot, which is a publicly
traded company.403 Riot mined 5,554 Bitcoin in 2022, which was worth
398 26 U.S.C § 61.
399 I.R.S. Notice 2014-21, 2014-1 C.B. 938.
400 Id.
401 Id.
402 See Miles Brooks, Crypto Mining Taxes: Beginner’s Guide 2023, COINLEDGER (Mar.
27, 2023), https://coinledger.io/blog/how-to-handle-cryptocurrency-mining-on-your-
taxes#frequently-asked-questions-about-crypto-mining [https://perma.cc/37XL-XJ5F].
403 Riot Platforms, Inc. Common Stock (RIOT), NASDAQ, https://www.nasdaq.com/
market-activity/stocks/riot [https://perma.cc/7KFZ-KF35] (last visited Sept. 24, 2023).
119
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
around $259.2 million.404 In January 2023, Riot broke a record by mining
740 Bitcoin in just a month, which was worth approximately $16.8
million.405 The Bitcoin’s fair market value at the time it is received is
includible in Riot’s gross income.406
[112] In sum, IRS Notice 2014-21 provides, in part, that cryptocurrencies
are taxed as “property,” and when cryptocurrency is earned from mining
rewards, the cryptocurrencies’ fair market value at the time of receipt is
includible in the taxpayer’s gross income.407 As a result of the double
taxation scheme inherent in transacting with “property,” it is impractical for
businesses and individuals to adopt cryptocurrency as a form of payment.408
Further, cryptocurrencies are volatile assets.409 Including the fair market
404 Press Release, Riot Blockchain, Inc., Riot Reports Full Year 2022 Financial Results,
Current Operational and Financial Results, Current Operational and Financial Highlights
(Mar. 2, 2023), https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/news-events/press-
releases/detail/147/riot-reports-full-year-2022-financial-results-current
[https://perma.cc/UH3S-KFF6].
405 Press Release, Riot Blockchain, Inc., Riot Produces New All-Time High of 740
Bitcoin in January 2023 and Provides Infrastructure Update (Feb. 6, 2023),
https://www.riotplatforms.com/investors/news-events/press-releases/detail/146/riot-
announces-january-2023-production-and-operations [https://perma.cc/R6NA-279Y];
Andrew Asmakov, Riot Just Mined The Most Bitcoin It Ever Has in a Month, DECRYPT
(Feb. 6, 2023), https://decrypt.co/120672/riot-just-mined-most-bitcoin-ever-has-month
[https://perma.cc/5VGV-BQFF].
406 I.R.S. Notice 2014-21, 2014-16 I.R.B. 938–39.
407 Id. at 938.
408 Katherine Baer et al., Taxing Cryptocurrencies, 12 (IMF Working Paper, WP/23/144,
2023).
409 Edul Patel, From Lack of Regulations To Speculation: Why Crypto Is More Volatile
Than Stocks, ABP LIVE, https://news.abplive.com/business/crypto/from-lack-of-
regulations-to-speculation-why crypto-is-more-volatile-than-stocks-1582538
[https://perma.cc/KGV5-QHVV] (last updated Feb. 16, 2023, 12:49 PM).
120
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
value of cryptocurrencies earned from mining and performing services in a
taxpayer’s gross income—and receiving a fair market value basis in
cryptocurrency—potentially leads to disastrous tax consequences.
B. More Recent IRS Activity
[113] The IRS published Notice 2014-21 almost a decade ago, and the IRS
has released subsequent Notices and Rulings pertaining to cryptocurrencies
since then.410 While the IRS has been forced to address complex substantive
tax issues regarding cryptocurrencies, recent IRS efforts have been targeted
towards the complex administrative issues cryptocurrencies pose.411
1. IRS Revenue Ruling 2019-24
[114] IRS Revenue Ruling 2019-24 announced that any cryptocurrency
“air dropped” to a taxpayer, because of a “hard fork,” is includible in the
taxpayer’s gross income.412 A hard fork is when a cryptocurrency on a
blockchain undergoes a protocol change, which results in a permanent
diversion from the existing blockchain history, and a new cryptocurrency is
created on the new blockchain.413 After the hard fork, new cryptocurrency
transactions are recorded on the new blockchain and transactions involving
the “legacy” cryptocurrency are recorded on the legacy blockchain.414
Sometimes when a blockchain undergoes a hard fork, the blockchain will
“air drop” the new tokens to the legacy token holders.415 Pursuant to
410 See I.R.S. Notice 2019-2221; Rev. Rul. 2019-24, 2019-44 I.R.B. 1004.
411 See Rev. Rul. 2019-24, 2019-44 I.R.B. 1004.
412 Id.
413 Id.
414 Id.
415 Id.
121
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
Revenue Ruling 2019-24, when a blockchain network undergoes a hard fork
and airdrops new tokens to U.S. taxpayers, the new airdropped tokens
constitute gross income under IRC § 61.416
2. Administrative Efforts to Prevent Tax Evasion
[115] The IRS is focusing its administrative efforts on identifying
taxpayers with cryptocurrency holdings.417 After IRS Notice 2019-132, the
IRS sent letters to virtual currency owners advising them to pay the taxes
they failed to include in prior taxable years.418 In 2021, 2022 and 2023, the
IRS required taxpayers to answer a new “yes or no” virtual currency
question when taxpayers filed Forms 1040, 1040-SR, and 1040-NR.419
Taxpayers who disposed of any virtual currency held as a capital asset
through sale, exchange, or transfer must answer “yes,” compute their capital
gains and losses on Form 8949, and report their gain or loss as income on
Schedule D Capital Gains and Losses.420
[116] The IRS is put in a difficult position here: it is used to dealing with
financial instruments passing through centralized intermediaries, but
cryptocurrency has no such intermediary besides centralized exchanges,
416 See Rev. Rul. 2019-24, 2019-44 I.R.B. 1004.
417 I.R.S. News Release IR-2019-132 (Jul. 26, 2019).
418 Guinevere Moore, Virtual Currency Reality: The IRS Crack Down on Cryptocurrency,
MOORE TAX LAW GROUP (Sept. 2019), https://www.mooretaxlawgroup.com/wp-
content/uploads/sites/1604214/2020/05/jtpp_21-04_moore.pdf [https://perma.cc/86PJ-
DT5S].
419 I.R.S. News Release IR-2023-12 (Jan. 24, 2023).
420 Id.
122
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
some of which are not in the United States.421 Moreover, cryptocurrency
investors could either leave cryptocurrencies in their wallets or bypass
centralized exchanges by using decentralized exchanges and, consequently,
make no reporting on their returns, which is likely what led to Notice 2019-
132.422
3. IRS Proposed Regulations for Cryptocurrency
Brokers
[117] Most recently, the IRS issued proposed regulations that extend
reporting requirements to cryptocurrency “brokers”.423 IRC § 6045 requires
every person doing business as a broker to, when required by the Secretary
of Treasury, file an information return with the name and address of each
customer, details regarding gross proceeds, and the adjusted basis of certain
categories of assets sold.424 Section 80603(a) of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act amends the § 6045 definition of “broker” to
include any person who, for consideration, provides services effectuating
transfers of digital assets on behalf of other persons.425
421 John Buhl, Treasury Takes Big-Picture View with Newest Crypto Proposal, TAX
POLICY CENTER (Sept. 19, 2023), https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxvox/treasury-takes-
big-picture-view-newest-crypto-proposal [https://perma.cc/C5U8-S9RE].
422 Joyce Beebe, Did You Report Your Bitcoin Income to the IRS?, BAKER INST. (Apr. 10,
2020), https://www.bakerinstitute.org/research/did-you-report-your-bitcoin-income-irs
[https://perma.cc/TPG2-53QR].
423 Gross Proceeds and Basis Reporting by Brokers and Determination of Amount
Realized and Basis for Digital Asset Transactions, 88 Fed. Reg. 59576 (proposed Aug.
29, 2023), https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/08/29/2023-17565/gross-
proceeds-and-basis-reporting-by-brokers-and-determination-of-amount-realized-and-
basis-for [https://perma.cc/8Z69-A6R9].
424 26 U.S.C. § 6045 (2021).
425 88 Fed. Reg. 59576, supra note 423, at 5.
123
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[118] In explaining the rationale for the new reporting rules, the IRS says:
Digital assets have grown in popularity as both a payment
method and an investment or trading asset. Proponents
believe that digital assets may offer potential benefits over
traditional fiat currencies, such as lower transactions costs
and faster transaction speeds. Digital assets may also be
popular, however, because the distributed ledger record of
transactions does not include the identity of the parties
involved in the transactions. This pseudonymity creates a
significant risk to tax administration.426
[119] The IRS will need to continue its efforts in easing the administrative
burdens cryptocurrencies pose, but there are also unresolved substantive tax
issues.
C. Unanswered Questions on How the United States Taxes
Cryptocurrency
[120] There are three substantive, unresolved tax issues covered here: (1)
whether staking rewards are includible in gross income when they are
received; (2) whether cryptocurrency traders can make a mark-to-market
election; and (3) whether investors in crypto assets are permitted to make
an obsolescence of nondepreciable property deduction.
1. Earning Cryptocurrency as Staking Rewards on PoS
Blockchains
[121] As mentioned above, IRS Notice 2014-21 provides that
cryptocurrency earned as mining rewards are includible in the taxpayer’s
426 Id.
124
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
gross income when the cryptocurrency is received.427 In the years since
Notice 2014-21, the IRS has failed to provide any guidance on whether
staking rewards are includible in gross income when they are received.
[122] A Nashville couple, Joshua and Jessica Jarrett (collectively, “the
Jarretts”), purchased Tezos (XTZ) coins and staked the coins with a node
on Tezos’ PoS network.428 The Jarretts received 8,876 Tezos (XTZ) in
staking rewards during 2019.429 The Tezos coins were worth $9,407 when
the Jarretts received them, and the Jarretts reported that amount as income
and paid the corresponding income taxes.430 On July 31, 2020, the Jarretts
filed an amended tax return requesting a $3,793 refund from the IRS.431 The
Jarretts argued that, under IRC § 1001(a), the virtual currency they earned
as staking rewards failed to constitute taxable income because property is
only taxed when it is sold or dispossessed, rather than when it is created.432
The Department of Justice ordered the IRS to issue the $3,793 refund to the
Jarretts, but the Jarretts refused the refund because the IRS did not provide
427 Andrea Ben-Yosef, Cryptocurrency stakers must include rewards in gross income
upon gaining control of them, TAX NEWS UPDATE (Aug. 10, 2023),
https://globaltaxnews.ey.com/news/2023-1388-cryptocurrency-stakers-must-include-
rewards-in-gross-income-upon-gaining-control-of-them [https://perma.cc/U2NH-SHJ6].
428 Jarrett v. United States, No. 3:21-CV-00419, 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 178743, at *5
(M.D. Tenn., Sept. 30, 2022).
429 Shehan Chandrasekera, Crypto Couple's Victory Against The IRS Comes At The Cost
Of Regulatory Clarity, FORBES (Mar. 7, 2022, 9:51 AM), https://www.forbes.com/sites/
shehanchandrasekera/2022/03/07/crypto-couples-victory-against-the-irs-comes-at-the-
cost-of-regulatory-clarity/?sh=2a00a56f48f9 [https://perma.cc/A3BH-432X].
430 Id.
431 Id.
432 Id.
125
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
its rationale for issuing the refund.433 The IRS argued the refund rendered
the Jarretts’ action moot and filed a motion to dismiss, which was granted
on September 30, 2022.434 Thus, taxpayers earning staking rewards on a
PoS blockchain lack clarity on how, if, or when the IRS will tax their
earnings.
2. Whether Cryptocurrency Traders Can Make a Mark-
To-Market Election
[123] Internal Revenue Code (IRC) § 475(f) provides commodities and
securities traders with the option to make a “mark-to-market” election.435 If
a trader makes a mark-to-market election, all the securities (and/or
commodities) they hold are deemed as sold for their fair market value at the
end of the year, and the taxpayer recognizes ordinary gain or loss associated
with the deemed sales.436 If the taxpayer has a gain after the deemed sales,
then the taxpayer recognizes ordinary income on the gain. But if the
taxpayer recognizes a loss on the deemed sales, the taxpayer is permitted to
deduct the losses from their ordinary income.437 The taxpayer still holds the
assets, and each asset’s basis is adjusted to its current fair market value, just
as if the trader sold the assets to themselves. Recharacterizing a capital loss
as an ordinary loss is significant for two reasons: (1) ordinary income is
taxed at a higher rate than capital income, so deductions against ordinary
income are more valuable than deductions against capital income; and (2)
433 Jarrett v. United States, No. 3:21-CV-00419, 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 178743, at *5
(M.D. Tenn., Sept. 30, 2022).
434 Id. at *1.
435 I.R.C. § 475(f).
436 Id.
437 Michael R. Harmon & William N. Kulsrud, Sec. 475 Mark-to-Market Election, THE
TAX ADVISER (Feb. 1, 2010), https://www.thetaxadviser.com/issues/2010/feb/
sec475mark-to-marketelection.html [https://perma.cc/H5V4-Z9NL].
126
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
taxpayers can typically deduct only up to $3,000 in capital losses against
their ordinary income, and any excess losses are carried forward to the next
taxable year if the taxpayer lacks sufficient capital gains to absorb the
losses.438
[124] § 475(a) requires securities dealers to use mark-to-market
accounting for all securities held in inventory at the end of the taxable
year.439 The mark-to-market election, however, is available to commodities
traders and dealers, as well as securities traders.440 The SEC and the CFTC
have fought over whether cryptocurrencies are securities or commodities,
but the commissions agree Bitcoin is a commodity and acknowledge most
cryptocurrencies either classify as securities or commodities.441
Nonetheless, cryptocurrency traders and dealers lack uniform guidance on
whether they are permitted to make this, at times, valuable election.
3. Memorandum Number 202302011
[125] Internal Revenue Code § 165 governs losses for United States
taxpayers.442 One of the losses, permitted by § 165(g), is called the
“worthless securities” deduction.443 Under § 165(g), if any security
becomes worthless during a taxable year, the loss resulting therefrom shall
438 Julia Kagan, How to Deduct Stock Losses From Your Tax Bill, INVESTOPEDIA, https://
www.investopedia.com/articles/personal-finance/100515/heres-how-deduct-your-stock-
losses-your-tax-bill.asp [https://perma.cc/X8PY-9CPS] (last updated Mar. 31, 2023).
439 26 U.S. § 475(a).
440 Id.
441 Brady Dale, Bitcoin is the only coin the SEC Chair will call a commodity, AXIOS (Jun.
28, 2022), https://www.axios.com/2022/06/28/bitcoin-is-the-only-coin-the-sec-chair-will-
call-a-commodity [https://perma.cc/H292-V86Y].
442 I.R.C. § 165.
443 Id. at § 165(g).
127
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
be treated as a loss from a sale or exchange if the investor is unwilling or
unable to sell or otherwise dispose of the security in a taxable transaction.444
Fraud is rampant in the cryptocurrency industry, with developers luring
investors’ capital by promising to build an expert project, only to abandon
the project after receiving investor’s money.445 As a result, many
cryptocurrency investors have been left with worthless cryptocurrencies,
and taxpayers requested guidance from the IRS as to whether the worthless
securities deduction applies to cryptocurrencies.446
[126] In January 2023, the IRS Office of Chief Counsel released
Memorandum 202302011, which concluded that cryptocurrency investors
were not permitted a § 165(g) deduction because cryptocurrencies do not
fall within § 165(g)(2)’s definition of securities.447 The Memorandum
indicates a deduction may be available, however, under § 165(a) through
Treasury Regulation § 1.165-2(a), which addresses obsolescence of
nondepreciable property.448 Under Treasury Regulations § 1.165-2(a),
taxpayers can claim a loss when: (1) the loss is incurred in a business or a
transaction entered for profit; (2) the loss arises from the sudden termination
of usefulness in the business or transaction; and (3) the property is
permanently discarded from use, or the transaction is discontinued.449
444 Id.
445 Amiah Taylor, Watch out for the ‘rug pull’ crypto scam that’s tricking investors out of
millions, FORTUNE (Mar. 2, 2022, 7:36 PM), https://fortune.com/2022/03/02/crypto-
scam-rug-pull-what-is-it/ [https://perma.cc/3HBD-ZFEV].
446 Id.
447 I.R.S. Gen. Couns. Mem. 202302011 (Jan. 13, 2023).
448 Id.
449 26 C.F.R. § 1.165-2
128
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[127] Memorandum 202302011 falls short of explicitly permitting the
deduction because, under the facts considered in the Memorandum, the
investor never abandoned the crypto asset.450 Moreover, the Memorandum
is inconclusive on whether the crypto asset is worthless when each token is
worth less than a penny and the token is traded on at least one exchange.451
However, Memorandum 202302011 does indicate whether an investor
holding a worthless crypto asset will be permitted to take a capital loss when
the investor abandons the asset.452 Abandoning the worthless crypto asset
in this context would likely be satisfied by “burning” a crypto asset, which
is the process of sending a crypto asset to an inaccessible wallet on the
blockchain network.453
V. OFFERING A CRYPTOCURRENCY REGULATION AND TAXATION
SCHEME FOR THE UNITED STATES
[128] When Satoshi Nakamoto wrote the Bitcoin white paper in 2009, the
U.S. federal government had just printed $1 trillion in new money to bail
out the financial sector following the 2007/2008 financial crisis.454 This
influx of $1 trillion increased the existing money supply and decreased the
450 I.R.S. Gen. Couns. Mem. 202302011, supra note 447.
451 Id.
452 Id.
453 Nathan Reiff, What Does It Mean to Burn Crypto? Practical Applications,
INVESTOPEDIA, https://www.investopedia.com/tech/cryptocurrency-burning-can-it-
manage-inflation/ [https://perma.cc/YN7U-P2AY] (last updated June 2, 2022)
[hereinafter Reiff, What Does It Mean to Burn Crypto?].
454 Frank Emmert, The Regulation of Cryptocurrencies in the United States of America,
RESEARCHGATE (Feb. 2022), https://www.researchgate.net/publication/358906189_
The_Regulation_of_Cryptocurrencies_in_the_United_States_of_America
[https://perma.cc/GZ5Y-398H].
129
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
value of assets and savings owned by corporations and individuals.455 In
addition to resolving the issues inherit with third-parties processing
payments, Satoshi sought to create a payment system where no central bank
had power to directly impact a currency’s value.456 Satoshi embedded a
message on the first block on Bitcoin’s blockchain that said, “Chancellor on
the Brink of Second Bailout for Banks.”457
[129] What Satoshi created “is a lot like gold,” but “it is digital rather than
a heavy, unwieldy object. In other words, Bitcoin could serve the same
purposes as gold in terms of a currency, but much more efficiently because
it does not have any mass and can be sent easily from place to place.”458
Some experts believe blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies will
enhance economic efficiency and have a broad lasting impact on global
financial markets in payments, banking, securities settlement, title
recording, cyber security, and more.459 Blockchain technology’s full
potential will likely be unmet, however, unless our regulatory and taxation
schemes protect consumers and incentivize adopting cryptocurrency as a
form of payment.
455 Id.
456 See Allison Nathan, Interview with Eric Posner, 21 GLOB. MACRO RSCH.: TOP OF
MIND, 3 (2014), https://www.dwt.com/files/paymentlawadvisor/2014/01/GoldmanSachs-
Bit-Coin.pdf [https://perma.cc/3P9K-JLSC].
457 Carla Tardi, Genesis Block: Bitcoin Definition, Mysteries, Secret Message,
INVESTOPEDIA (July 2, 2021), https://www.investopedia.com/terms/g/genesis-
block.asp#:~:text=Bitcoin's%20Genesis%20Block%20Secret%20Message,of%20second
%20bailout%20for%20banks.%22 [https://perma.cc/8TF3-UEHK].
458 Nathan, supra note 456, at 4.
459 Chairman’s Testimony on Virtual Currencies: The Roles of the SEC and CFTC:
Hearing Before the S. Comm. on Banking, Hous. and Urb. Aff. 115th Cong. (2018)
(written testimony of Christopher Giancarlo, Chairman of the CFTC).
130
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
[130] As to regulation, Congress should create a joint SRO between the
SEC and CFTC, provide qualitative and quantitative measures to determine
whether a digital asset is a commodity or a security, and institute consumer
protections such as annual verification of proof of reserves. From a taxation
standpoint, the United States should provide leniency by establishing non-
recognition events and allowing crypto traders and nodes to make
deductions that are available for commodities and securities activities.
A. How the United States Should Regulate Cryptocurrency
[131] To incentivize its adoption from a regulatory standpoint, the United
States should create a joint self-regulatory organization with original
jurisdiction over all cryptocurrencies. Congress should also adopt the FIT
Act’s functionality and decentralization inquiries to provide objective
measures in determining whether a crypto is a commodity or a security.
Further, requiring crypto intermediaries to annually verify proof of reserves,
as the RFIA does, will provide better consumer protection.
1. Advocating for a Joint Self-Regulatory Organization
with Original Jurisdiction over Cryptocurrency
Activities
[132] The SEC and CFTC have attempted to regulate this novel industry
with an already-existing regulatory scheme. Employing the United States’
existing regulatory scheme has worked to retroactively prosecute fraudulent
activity, such as in SEC v. Bitcoin Savings and Trust, but it has failed to
provide effective, proactive oversight for investors, as evidenced by the
FTX scandal. The U.S. federal government has attempted to fit a square peg
(cryptocurrency) into a round hole (the existing regulatory scheme). The
SEC and CFTC have each taken their turns regulating cryptocurrency in
different contexts, and this bifurcated approach has yielded a lack of clarity
for investors and developers.460 Because cryptocurrencies are unlike assets
460 Id.
131
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
the world has seen before, Congress should create a new agency to serve as
the first line of regulation for the cryptocurrency industry.
[133] Congress should establish a joint self-regulatory organization to
serve as a one-stop agency for all cryptocurrency activities. Providing the
SRO with original jurisdiction over all cryptocurrency activities would
prevent the initial turf war that ensues between the CFTC and the SEC over
current cryptocurrency matters. Further, the CFTC and SEC could pool their
capital and expertise together to provide clear, uniform guidance to
cryptocurrency developers, while also overseeing markets to protect
cryptocurrency investors. Under the current regulatory regime—and even
after the Ripple Labs case—crypto developers are unsure whether they have
engaged in the unregistered sale of securities or commodities, but the SRO
could provide guidance on all cryptocurrencies and serve as an intermediary
between developers and regulators. If the SRO successfully oversees
cryptocurrency markets, investors will have more confidence in the space,
which would logically bring in more investment. Because this technology
and the products offered are unlike anything the world has seen before,
Congress should create a new regulatory body rather than attempt to use its
current regulatory scheme.
[134] As mentioned in Section IV, the former version of the Lummis-
Gillibrand RFIA tasks the CFTC and SEC with studying, reporting, and
developing a plan for the two agencies to create a joint SRO.461 The two
Senators are not alone in believing a new SRO is needed to regulate
cryptocurrencies: the former CFTC Chair, Timothy Massad, endorsed this
approach in an interview in August 2022.462 Massad considered the Digital
Commodity Exchange Act of 2022, which provided the CFTC with
exclusive jurisdiction over cryptocurrencies, and said it was unworkable
because the CFTC is underfunded and would not be able to handle it
461 Id.
462 Velasquez, supra note 358.
132
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
alone.463 With a joint SRO, the CFTC and the SEC would have the
collective expertise and resources to oversee the cryptocurrency industry,
and over time, the SRO would provide clear guidance to developers as well
as investor protections.
2. Advocating for a Qualitative and Quantitative Howey
Test
[135] The FIT Act and the RFIA take two different approaches in
clarifying when a digital asset constitutes a security or a commodity. The
RFIA codifies the Howey test, which fails to give the appropriate clarity
developers and investors in the crypto industry seek. The FIT Act, on the
other hand, provides qualitative and quantitative measures for determining
whether a cryptocurrency constitutes a digital commodity or a restricted
digital asset. Further, the FIT Act maintains that digital assets remain
restricted digital assets, subject to the SEC’s regulatory enforcement, until
either the SEC or CFTC certifies a functional blockchain as
decentralized.464 The FIT Act’s approach provides more clarity than the
RFIA’s, and Congress should adopt legislation with mechanisms like the
FIT Act’s functional and decentralization measures.
3. Advocating for Annually Verifying Proof of Reserves
[136] From a consumer protection standpoint, the RFIA requiring digital
asset intermediaries to undergo annual verification of proof of reserves
provides more extensive consumer protections than the FIT Act. The FIT
Act requires digital commodity exchanges to “establish standards and
procedures that are designed to protect and ensure the safety of consumer
463 Id.
464 See e.g., Financial Innovation and Technology of the 21st Century Act, H.R. 4763,
118th Cong. (2023).
133
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
money, assets, and property.”465 While the FIT Act provides explicit
measures for determining whether an asset is regulated as a commodity or
a security, it imposes vague reporting and consumer protection standards.
The opposite is true with the RFIA; requiring digital asset intermediaries to
undergo annual audits ensuring customers’ funds are available is a logical
and worthy policy.
B. A More Lenient Taxation Scheme
[137] Taxing cryptocurrencies as “property” disincentivizes businesses
and individuals to receive payment in cryptocurrency for two main reasons:
(1) it provides two layers of taxation—a tax on the fair market value of the
cryptocurrency at ordinary income rates and a capital tax when the asset is
sold or dispossessed; and (2) it fails to account for cryptocurrencies’
extreme volatility, and a taxpayer may be taxed on ordinary income
exceeding the cryptocurrency’s subsequent fair market value.466 To
incentivize cryptocurrencies’ adoption, there are four policies the United
States should adopt for greater leniency in taxing cryptocurrencies: (1)
providing a non-recognition event up to a certain amount when using
cryptocurrency to pay for goods or services; (2) taxing staking rewards only
when the asset is sold or dispossessed; (3) allowing nodes to make a mark-
to-market type election at the end of the taxable year; and (4) allowing
investors in crypto assets to make an obsolescence of non-depreciable
property deduction.
1. Providing Non-Recognition Events When Using
Cryptocurrency for Goods or Services
[138] As discussed in Section IV, transacting with cryptocurrencies for
goods or services yields more complex tax consequences than transactions
465 See id. at § 404.
466 Joe Lebkind, Cryptocurrency Taxes, INVESTOPEDIA, https://www.investopedia.com/
tech/taxes-and-crypto/ [https://perma.cc/NSH8-WHAS] (last updated July 23, 2022).
134
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
completed with USD. Complexities aside, transacting in cryptocurrencies
can result in an individual recognizing a taxable gain when using
cryptocurrency to pay for goods or services, such as the 1,000 ADA
investor’s $68.77 gain when paying 28.07 ADA for tutoring services.
Cryptocurrencies are taxed like securities, but cryptocurrencies were
invented to operate as a currency.467 To limit the extra level of taxation and
to treat cryptocurrencies more like currencies, Congress should establish a
non-recognition event up to a certain amount when cryptocurrencies are
used to pay for goods or services. The RFIA, for example, provides for a
$200 non-recognition event on gains or losses when parties transact with
cryptocurrencies for goods or services.468 Under the RFIA’s approach, the
1,000 ADA investor’s $68.77 gain would not be included in their gross
income when they paid for tutoring services, which would be a step towards
taxing cryptocurrencies like actual currencies.
[139] Although the RFIA limited the gain or loss exemption to $200, other
countries have provided for even more lenient structures. In Germany,
cryptocurrency investors are not taxed on the first €600 realized from short-
term capital gains on cryptocurrencies.469 German cryptocurrency investors
initially paid no tax on long-term capital gains realized from selling or
spending cryptocurrencies—until that taxation scheme was reversed by the
German Federal Fiscal Court in March of 2023.470 Nonetheless, a de
467 Andy Rosen, Cryptocurrency: A Basic Guide for Beginners, NERDWALLET,
https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/investing/cryptocurrency [https://perma.cc/L5AQ-
77Z9] (last updated Aug. 11, 2023).
468 Lummis-Gillibrand Responsible Fin. Innovation Act, S. 4356, 117th Cong. (2022).
469 Cryptocurrency taxation in Germany, BITCOIN.COM, https://www.bitcoin.com/get-
started/cryptocurrency-taxation-in-germany/ [https://perma.cc/P2LY-9NCP] (last visited
Oct. 7, 2023).
470 Jens-Uwe Hinder, German Federal Fiscal Court Decides on the Taxation of
Cryptocurrencies, MORRISON FOERSTER (Mar. 3, 2023), https://www.mofo.com/
resources/insights/230303-german-federal-fiscal-court [https://perma.cc/4KYC-X986].
135
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
minimis non-recognition event when using cryptocurrencies to pay for
goods or services would allow people to use cryptocurrencies more like a
currency than “property.”
2. Staking Rewards Should Be Includible in Gross
Income Only when Sold or Dispossessed
[140] I strongly believe cryptocurrency earned as staking rewards should
be taxed only when the assets are sold or dispossessed. As a statutory matter,
whether staking rewards are taxable income under § 1001(a) is an incredibly
close call. On some PoS blockchains, staking rewards are sent from the node
to the individual staking their coins when the staking rewards are claimed,
which likely constitutes dispossession of property under § 1001(a).471 On
other PoS blockchains, however, staking rewards auto-populate inside the
individual’s cryptocurrency wallet.472 When staking rewards auto-populate
in someone’s wallet, there has been no sale, exchange, or dispossession of
the cryptocurrency.473 In this way, the transaction shows that the staker is
involved in the creation of the property, as the Jarretts argued in United
States v. Jarrett.474
[141] If the United States federal government treats staking rewards sent
from the node to the staker differently than staking rewards that auto-
populate in someone’s wallet, blockchain developers could eventually
471 See 26 U.S.C. § 1001(a).
472 SafeMoon Dev, SafeMoon: A Deflationary Reflection Token with Automated Liquidity
Acquisition, https://pdf4pro.com/view/safemoon-a-deflationary-reflection-token-with-
automated-624956.html [https://perma.cc/69AU-62XL] (last visited Sept. 24, 2023).
473 Krisztian Sandor, Crypto Staking 101: What is Staking?, COINDESK,
https://www.coindesk.com/learn/crypto-staking-101-what-is-staking/
[https://perma.cc/N3QT-RBE6] (last updated Feb. 21, 2023, 2:34 PM).
474 Jarrett v. United States, No. 3:21-CV-00419, 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 178743, at *5
(M.D. Tenn., Sept. 30, 2022).
136
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
upgrade their networks to allow staking rewards to auto-populate in stakers’
wallets. As such, treating staking rewards differently depending on how the
staker received the cryptocurrency will be only a part-time fix as networks
would eventually evolve to adapt to the taxation scheme.
[142] Under the RFIA, cryptocurrencies earned as staking rewards are
includible gross income only when sold or dispossessed.475 The RFIA goes
a step further by also providing that mining rewards are includible in gross
income only when the asset is sold or dispossessed, thereby overruling IRS
Notice 2014-21.476
[143] As discussed in Section II, PoW blockchains consume substantially
more energy than PoS blockchains. From a policy standpoint, Congress
could show bias towards PoS blockchains, as they are healthier for the
environment. Moreover, treating staking rewards differently depending on
how the staker receives the cryptocurrency would only be a part-time fix as
blockchain developers could alter the software for staking rewards to auto-
populate in users’ wallets. If the United States federal government adopts a
scheme where staking rewards earned on a PoS blockchain are not taxable
until the assets are sold or dispossessed, policymakers would incentivize
investors towards blockchains that are healthier for the environment while
adopting a policy that will be workable in the future.
3. Allowing PoS and PoW Nodes to Make a Mark-to-
Market Election on Cryptocurrency Holdings
[144] Under IRS Notice 2014-21, the fair market value of mining rewards
are includible in the recipient taxpayer’s gross income at the time they are
received, and the recipient receives a fair market value basis in the
475 Lummis-Gillibrand Responsible Fin. Innovation Act, S. 4356, 117th Cong. (2022).
476 Id.
137
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
cryptocurrencies.477 It is still unclear whether staking rewards are includible
in gross income at the time they are received, but if staking rewards are
includible in gross income at the time of receipt, then this proposal applies
to network participants on PoS and PoW blockchains.
[145] If the fair market value of cryptocurrency earned as mining and
staking rewards is includible in the taxpayer’s gross income at the time the
cryptocurrency is received, the value of the cryptocurrency holdings may
subsequently decrease after nodes earn the cryptocurrency. Such a situation
would result in the taxpayer reporting more gross income in their tax return
than the underlying assets’ current fair market value. For example: consider
a Bitcoin miner who earned 1 Bitcoin in mining rewards on April 19, 2022,
when Bitcoin’s highest price for the day was $41,665.50.478 The miner
would have to include $41,665.50 in their gross income, regardless of
whether the miner sold or held the Bitcoin.479 At the end of the taxable year,
on December 31, 2022, Bitcoin’s highest price for the day was
$16,625.05.480 Thus, although the miner included $41,665.50 in their gross
income, the Bitcoin they earned and continued to hold was worth only
$16,625.05 at the end of the 2022 calendar taxable year.481
[146] To prevent such an excessively harsh tax consequence, Congress
could do two things: (1) pass legislation that provides that mining and
staking rewards are includible in gross income only when the assets are sold
477 I.R.S. Notice 2014-21, 2014-1 C.B. 938.
478 See The closing price for Bitcoin (BTC) on April 19, 2022, STATMUSE,
https://www.statmuse.com/money/ask/bitcoin-price-april-19th-2022
[https://perma.cc/CP7K-YD58] (last visited Oct. 7, 2023).
479 I.R.S. Notice 2014-21, 2014-1 C.B. 938.
480 See Bitcoin historical data, COINMARKETCAP, https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/
bitcoin/historical-data/ [https://perma.cc/Z7ZJ-65F2] (last visited Nov. 8, 2023).
481 Id.
138
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
or dispossessed, such as the RFIA; or (2) pass legislation providing a mark-
to-market type election where nodes could elect to have a deemed sale on
the cryptocurrency rewards they earned the past year. Under the mark-to-
market election, nodes would recognize a gain or loss on the deemed sale,
and any losses realized could be deducted from the taxpayer’s ordinary
income. The taxpayer’s basis in cryptocurrencies earned from mining and
staking rewards would be adjusted to the current fair market value, and in
effect, the amount includible in the taxpayer’s gross income would be equal
to their cryptocurrency holdings’ value at the end of the taxable year rather
than the value at the time the crypto is received. In this way, nodes would
not have to pay high ordinary income taxes on unrealized capital sales, and
nodes’ gross income would more accurately reflect their current holdings
and accessions to wealth.
4. Allowing Cryptocurrency Traders a Mark-to-Market
Election
[147] Cryptocurrency traders, those who consider cryptocurrency trading
to constitute their trade or business, should also be permitted to make a
mark-to-market election at the end of a taxable year under IRC § 475. If the
United States federal government is going to tax cryptocurrencies as
property, this valuable election should also be available to cryptocurrency
traders as it is for securities and commodities traders. The current version
of the Lummis-Gillibrand RFIA provides this election to cryptocurrency
dealers.482
5. Allowing Investors in Crypto Assets to Take an
Obsolescence of Nondepreciable Property Loss
[148] Although Memorandum 202302011 is inconclusive as to whether
cryptocurrency investors are permitted to make a deduction under Treasury
482 Lummis-Gillibrand Responsible Financial Innovation Act, S. 2281, 118th Cong.
(2023), at § 806.
139
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
Regulations § 1.165-2(a),483 the IRS should adopt this policy.
Cryptocurrency investors can prove they have abandoned a crypto asset
through “burning” the asset, which is sending the asset to a wallet no one
can access.484 Burning an asset is the closest thing to abandoning property
in the cryptocurrency context; a person who burns a crypto asset
relinquishes all dominion or control over the asset.485 As to worthlessness,
the IRS should rely on an asset’s subjective worthlessness—as it does with
partnership interests. The IRS points out in Memorandum 202302011 that
a cryptocurrency may not be worthless if it is still traded on one exchange
because it still has the potential to grow in value.486 On decentralized
exchanges, however, any crypto asset can be posted for sale by any user.487
As such, if a taxpayer abandons a crypto asset by burning it, the IRS should
rely on the asset’s subjective value when determining if the taxpayer is
permitted a deduction under § 1.165-2(a).
VI. CONCLUSION
[149] Cryptocurrency refers to a digital asset that uses blockchain
technology to cryptographically record and process transactions.488
Cryptocurrency can be purchased on centralized exchanges, but it is wiser
483 See I.R.S. Gen. Couns. Mem. 202302011, supra note 447.
484 Reiff, What Does It Mean to Burn Crypto?, supra note 453.
485 See id.
486 I.R.S. Gen. Couns. Mem. 202302011, supra note 447.
487 See What are decentralized exchanges, and how do DEXs work?, COINTELEGRAPH,
https://cointelegraph.com/learn/what-are-decentralized-exchanges-and-how-do-dexs-
work [https://perma.cc/8GHF-8TMW] (last visited Oct. 7, 2023).
488 Jake Frankenfield, Cryptocurrency Explained With Pros and Cons for Investment,
INVESTOPEDIA, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/cryptocurrency.asp
[https://perma.cc/R5GK-PQ6B] (last updated Aug. 29, 2023).
140
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
to keep your cryptocurrency in a wallet to ensure you are the sole custodian
of your cryptocurrency.
[150] The United States has taken a regulation-through-litigation
approach to regulating cryptocurrency, which has resulted in unclear
guidance to cryptocurrency developers and investors. Cryptocurrencies are
considered commodities under the Commodity Exchange Act, and the
CFTC has regulatory oversight when a virtual currency is used in a
derivatives contract, or if there is fraud or manipulation involving a virtual
currency traded in interstate commerce.489 The SEC, on the other hand, has
regulatory oversight when a cryptocurrency passes the Howey test and is
therefore deemed an investment contract and thus a security.490 SEC v.
Ripple Labs, Inc. illustrates how difficult it is to apply the Howey test to
cryptocurrency, and it failed to provide a clear direction for determining
how the federal government will regulate cryptocurrencies when they are
sold in an ICO or when they are sold on secondary exchanges.491
Nonetheless, when an investment contract involves cryptocurrency, the
SEC has jurisdiction over the matter.492
[151] Two pieces of legislation, the FIT Act and the RFIA, attempt to
provide regulatory clarity and provide the CFTC with primary jurisdiction
over cryptocurrencies. The FIT Act provides an objective inquiry in
determining whether an asset is regulated by the SEC or the CFTC, which
489 Bitcoin Basics, CFTC (2019), https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/2019-
12/oceo_bitcoinbasics0218.pdf [https://perma.cc/YH9S-XCH2].
490 Nathan Reiff, Howey Test Definition: What It Means and Implications for
Cryptocurrency, INVESTOPEDIA, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/h/howey-test.asp
[https://perma.cc/T8H8-W2WA] (last updated July 31, 2023) [hereinafter Reiff, Howey
Test Definition].
491 See SEC v. Ripple Labs, Inc., No. 1:20-CV-10832, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120486
(S.D.N.Y. July 13, 2023).
492 Reiff, Howey Test Definition, supra note 490.
141
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology Volume XXX, Issue 1
is commendable. The RFIA, on the other hand, has excellent proposals for
taxation and consumer protections.
[152] The IRS treats cryptocurrencies as “property” for federal tax
purposes, and transactions involving cryptocurrency are therefore subject to
capital gains and losses.493 The value of any cryptocurrency earned from
mining is includible in a taxpayer’s gross income when the cryptocurrency
is received, and the miner gets that amount as basis in their
cryptocurrencies.494 It is still unknown whether cryptocurrency earned from
staking rewards is includible in a taxpayer’s gross income when they receive
it or whether it is includible only when the taxpayer sells or dispossesses
the staking rewards.
[153] I believe Congress should create a joint self-regulatory agency with
the SEC and the CFTC and give the new agency original jurisdiction over
all cryptocurrency activities. A new agency comprised of experts from the
CFTC and the SEC would provide a one-stop agency that could issue
uniform rules, regulations, and guidance to investors and developers in the
cryptocurrency realm. This paper endorses the FIT Act’s approach in
providing a qualitative and quantitate inquiry into whether a digital asset is
regulated by the SEC or the CFTC, and endorses the proof of reserve and
taxation proposals set forth in the RFIA. I believe Congress should provide
non-recognition events when cryptocurrencies are used to pay for goods or
services so cryptocurrencies are treated more like traditional currencies.
Further, I believe Congress should adopt a taxation scheme whereby staking
rewards are includable in gross income only when the asset is sold or
dispossessed. And lastly, Congress should permit cryptocurrency nodes and
traders to take the same deductions and make the same elections currently
available for securities and commodities activities.
493 I.R.S. Notice 2014-21, 2014-1 C.B. 938.
494 Id.
142

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/cryptocurrency_whitepaper-done.pdf
Cryptocurrency
The development and growth of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology
has implications for many industries, including finance, media, and healthcare.
In a series of papers, we will discuss the variety of ways in which cryptocurrencies
and blockchains are being used in different fields. This paper, the first in our
series of three papers, discusses cryptocurrencies, including how they operate in
conjunction with the blockchain and how Bitcoin, the first major cryptocurrency,
compares to traditional, fiat currencies.
What is a cryptocurrency? Bitcoin, the most well-known cryptocurrency, is a
decentralized digital currency network that employs
blockchain technology to facilitate digital transfers of
value, without the need for a centralized or trusted
middleman. Bitcoin, together with the underlying
blockchain technology, was developed by one or more
developers, who used the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto
and published a white paper and accompanying open
source code on October 31, 2008. The Bitcoin network is
open to the public (i.e., anyone can purchase or transfer
A cryptocurrency is a digital asset that can function
bitcoin) and allows for permissionless, trustworthy and
as a medium of exchange. As the name suggests,
secure transactions across the world.
cryptocurrencies use cryptography to secure and verify
transactions and control the production of new units
of the cryptocurrency. These transactions, in turn,
are stored on a “blockchain” ledger. Bitcoin, the first Quick Figures
cryptocurrency, was introduced in 2008 but did not (as of August 14, 2019)1
gain widespread public attention until early 2017.
Today, there are over 2,200 different cryptocurrencies,
Cryptocurrency:
some of the most notable of which are Bitcoin, Ether,
Number of Cryptocurrencies: Over 2,400
Ripple, Litecoin, Monero, and Facebook’s proposed
Number of Exchanges: Over 200
cryptocurrency Libra.
(regulated and unregulated)
What is Bitcoin? Total Market Cap: Over $265 billion
Bitcoin:
Number of Bitcoins in Circulation:
Over 17 million (out of a total 21 million)
Total Market Cap: Over $180 billion
24-Hour Trade Volume: Over $19 billion
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP 1
Purchasing/Using Bitcoin  Users can create an online account on a
cryptocurrency exchange, where the user can
provide credit card or bank account information
and purchase Bitcoin (or other cryptocurrencies) for
value.
 Once a user purchases cryptocurrency, he or she is
assigned a “private key” – a unique numeric ID like a
In the years since its creation, purchasing Bitcoins has
password consisting of a string of letters/numbers.
become relatively simple.
Each private key is personal to and only known by
the user to which it is assigned.
 Users can store their private keys in a “wallet” and
can choose from several different types available
 The private key is used to access the purchased
from multiple providers, including mobile wallets,
Bitcoins and to execute transactions.
web wallets and hardware wallets.
Comparison to Fiat Currency
This section explains certain key attributes of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies by comparison with traditional
cash or fiat currency. The following quick reference table provides a roadmap:
Cash Bitcoin
Security Anti-counterfeiting security Crypto security
No Double Spending Tangible exclusivity Ledger that records unique transactions
Regulatory Scheme Institutionally backed Decentralized peer-to-peer
(e.g., Central bank)
Accepted as Money Traditional payment method; Gaining acceptance by merchants and
global reciprocity consumers
Scarcity Central bank regulated supply Finite supply and computational limits
Stability of Value Generally stable, subject to Very volatile, to date
economic and policy factors
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP 2
Anti-counterfeiting Moreover, even a tiny difference in inputs produces
Cash a massively different output. Experts believe that
hacking the algorithm to reproduce the original input
is impossible with current computer technology.2
Second, Bitcoin transactions are subject to verification
before they are cleared to be included in the blockchain.
The blockchain ledger is itself cryptographically
hashed, and it is also distributed in hashed form
over multiple independent computer servers. This
makes the blockchain impenetrable according to
experts, earning it the nickname the “immutable
ledger.” As such, cryptocurrency transactions stored
Paper cash contains many security features to prevent
in a blockchain ledger are considered impervious to
counterfeiting. These can include: randomly disbursed
falsification or alteration.3
security fibers, watermarks, color-shifting ink that
No double spending
changes from copper to green as the note is tilted 45
degrees, a vertical security thread woven into the note’s Cash
fabric, and unique serial numbers.
Bitcoin Vendor A –$10.00
–$10.00
Party A
VVeennddoorr AB ––$$1100..0000
– $20.00
Party B
The value of money depends, in part, on the inability
to spend the same unit of money (e.g., the same $5
Security features of Bitcoin are twofold: Bitcoin’s
bill) multiple times. With cash, this concept is easy to
security relies on: (i) cryptography and (ii) the blockchain
understand. If you pay for your morning coffee with a
(i.e., the distributed public ledger).
$5 bill, for example, you can’t use that same $5 bill to
Cryptography converts ordinary data into a unique pay for anything else. Paying with a credit card, or even
series of numbers and letters that is unintelligible a mobile payment service operates to preserve the
without decryption. The National Security Agency same principle. Each individual transaction is verified
has developed various cryptographic algorithms, by a centralized intermediary like a bank or credit card
including Secure Hash Algorithm 256, which is company, and the amount spent is debited from the
a widely used cryptographic hashing standard consumer’s account instantaneously. When a person
employed by Bitcoin. Bitcoin’s hash algorithm always initiates a subsequent transaction, her or his account
returns a unique, but unintelligible, output result for is debited again, and the balance is further reduced.
any unique, unencrypted, input content. That is, no This ensures that a person can never spend the same
two different inputs will ever return the same output. money twice.
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP 3
Bitcoin Regulatory Scheme
Unlike cash, digital currencies (like Bitcoin and other Cash
cryptocurrencies) could, in principle, be copied absent
a mechanism that prevents double spending. In
reality, a digital coin can be thought of as an encrypted
computer file, and like any other file, it could be copied
and transferred multiple times without some form of
external protection.
Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies address this
problem by using the blockchain ledger to ensure that
no one can spend the same coin twice. When someone
tries to spend a Bitcoin, the transaction goes through
a verification process to confirm who is the current
In the United States, the Federal Reserve issues dollars
owner of that Bitcoin – this is done by comparing
and acts as a trusted third party to guarantee that
records maintained in the blockchain. If ownership is
currency. Fiat currencies of other nations are regulated
verified, then the transaction will be authorized; but, if
in substantially similar ways.
the ledger indicates that the Bitcoin has already been
spent by its purported owner, the transaction will be Bitcoin
declined.
DFCD 3454 BBEA 788A 751A Accepted
696C 24D9 7009 CA99 2D17
Waits for confimation
Party 1
0 A0 C8 C6 7 Abandoned Block Rejected
Waits for confimation
Party 2
Also, immediately upon its authorization, each new
Bitcoin runs on a peer-to-peer network. Like the
transaction is recorded in the blockchain ledger.
Internet, no one person or entity controls it, and
Therefore, if the same person tried to spend the same
there is no single regulatory or other central authority.
Bitcoin twice, the transaction would be invalid because
However, certain design and coding decisions have
the blockchain would already reflect the change of
historically been made by majority consensus amongst
ownership made in the first transaction. To reconcile
the Bitcoin community. Other key decisions, like the
near-simultaneous transactions, the blockchain uses
ultimate supply of Bitcoins available, are hard-coded
exact time stamps and a reconciliation protocol to
into Bitcoin’s underlying algorithms.
ensure that the priority of transactions is preserved.
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP 4
Accepted as money Bitcoin
Cash
Cash is a traditional payment method and is universally
accepted as a form of payment. Even mobile payment
services, like Venmo or Apple Pay, are traditionally
linked to cash.
Bitcoin
In a cryptocurrency system, there is no central authority
that regulates the monetary base. Instead, new units
of the cryptocurrency are created by the “nodes” or
servers that run the peer-to-peer network that stores
and operates the underlying blockchain ledger. Bitcoin
Certain merchants and larger companies (particularly
has a finite supply of 21 million Bitcoins, which is hard-
in the tech space) have begun to accept Bitcoin.
coded into the algorithm that the Bitcoin “nodes” run.
Companies that currently accept payment via Bitcoin
However, other cryptocurrencies have no maximum
include Overstock.com, Microsoft, Subway, Expedia
supply at all. For example Ethereum, which is the second
and others.4 Many of the companies that offer Bitcoin
largest cryptocurrency, has no supply cap.
as a payment option partner with a third party payment
processor to convert Bitcoin to local currency.
The process to create new Bitcoins is called “mining”
and involves solving cryptocurrency problems to find
However, as discussed further under Stability of Value
new secure hashing sequences.6 The computational
below, the high volatility of Bitcoin prices currently
power required to “mine” each new Bitcoin increases
makes it difficult for consumers and merchants to rely
with the number of Bitcoins in circulation. This is
on Bitcoin as an effective currency for transactions.
because the calculations to find new secure hashing
Scarcity
sequences become successively more difficult as the
Cash “easiest” possibilities are used up. The rate of new
In most major economies, currency is issued by as Bitcoin issuances is also programmed to decrease over
an instrument of policy. There was approximately time. While there are currently over 17 million Bitcoins
USD $1.70 trillion in circulation as of January 31, in circulation with a current market cap of over $180
2019, of which USD $1.66 trillion was in Federal billion, it is estimated that we won’t reach 21 million
Reserve notes.5 until 2140.7
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP 5
Stability of Value Bitcoin
Cash
Bitcoin (USD) Price, CoinMarketCap, <https://coinmarketcap.com/
currencies/bitcoin> (last visited June 10, 2019).
Bitcoin’s value is substantially more volatile and less
predictable than most traditional currencies. It has
Though relatively stable, the value of cash fluctuates
fluctuated dramatically, and sometimes without
based on a number of economic and policy factors. The
warning or clear correlations with other asset classes. In
value of national currencies tend to be stable in most
2017 alone, Bitcoin’s price rose from $973 in January to
major economies. However, in developing economies,
$5,856 in October, and skyrocketed towards $20,000 by
currency can fluctuate dramatically. For example,
year end. By February 2018, however, Bitcoin had fallen
as of November, 2018, Venezuela’s inflation rate hit
830,000%.8 Zimbabwe’s inflation rate reached 500 below $7,600. Most recently, in June 2019, Bitcoin’s
price rose to approximately $10,000 and has stabilized
billion percent at its peak in 2009. By contrast, the United
slightly since then.10 With its proposed cryptocurrency
States, however, has maintained a rate of inflation of
around two percent or less over the past decade.9 called Libra, Facebook and other founding members of
the Libra Association aim to create a cryptocurrency that
is backed by a reserve of real assets, which theoretically
would be significantly less volatile than Bitcoin.
Conclusion
Many believe cryptocurrencies have potential to become widely accepted as a form of currency. However, extreme
price volatility and other factors currently pose headwinds for widespread adoption of cryptocurrencies. Nonetheless,
cryptographic security and the blockchain ledger offer unique qualities that arguably rival traditional currencies in
certain respects.
We invite you to read the next paper in our series, which focuses on blockchain, the distributed ledger technology that
enables cryptocurrencies. That paper also covers Ethereum, the most prominent platform for building blockchain-
based applications.
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP 6
1. CoinMarketCap, <https://coinmarketcap.com> (last visited August 14, 2019).
2. See What is Cryptography?, Techopedia, <https://www.techopedia.com/definition/1770/cryptography> (last visited Sept. 25, 2018); see also
Roger A. Grimes, All You Need to Know About the Move From SHA-1 to SHA-2 Encryption, CSO Online, <https://www.csoonline.com/article/2879073/
encryption/all-you-need-to-know-about-the-move-from-sha1-to-sha2-encryption.html> (last visited Sept. 24, 2018).
3. See Don & Alex Tapscott, Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology behind Bitcoin is Changing Money, Business and the World 6-8, 17-18 (2016).
4. Who Accepts Bitcoins as Payment? List of Companies, Stores, Shops, 99bitcoins.com, <https://99bitcoins.com/who-accepts-bitcoins-payment-
companies-stores-take-bitcoins> (last visited October 26, 2018).
5. FAQs, <https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/currency_12773.htm> (last visited, June 10, 2019).
6. See Primavera De Filippi & Aaron Wright, Blockchain and the Rule of Law: The Rule of Code at 21 22, (Harvard University Press 2018).
7. Controlled Supply, Bitcoin Wiki, <https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Controlled_supply> (last visited Sept. 24, 2018); JP Buntinx, 80% of All Bitcoins Will Have
Been Mined In a Year From Now, NullTX, <https://nulltx.com/80-of-all-bitcoins-will-have-been-mined-in-a-year-from-now> (last visited Sept. 24,
2018); see also CoinMarketCap, <https://coinmarketcap.com/> (last visited August 14, 2019).
8. Will Martin, Venezuela’s Inflation Rate Just Hit 830,000% — and is likely to keep rising, Business Insider, <https://www.businessinsider.com/venezuela-
inflation-rate-hyperinflation-2018-11> (last visited January 17, 2019).
9. Noah Smith, Venezuela is Living a Hyperinflation Nightmare, Bloomberg, <https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2017-12-19/venezuela-is-living-
a-hyperinflation-nightmare> (last visited Sept. 24, 2018).
10. Hamza Shaban, The Highs and Lows of the Wild Year of Bitcoin, The Washington Post, <https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/
wp/2017/12/29/a-look-at-the-year-of-bitcoin/?utm_term=.c7b7ee822499> (last visited Sept. 24, 2018); David Meyer, Cryptocurrency Traders Lose
$115 Billion in 24 Hours as Bitcoin Bloodbath Continues, Fortune, <http://fortune.com/2018/02/02/bitcoin-crash-8000-ethereum-ripple> (last visited
Sept. 24, 2018); Bitcoin (USD) Price, CoinMarketCap, <https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/bitcoin> (last visited June 10, 2019).
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP 7
Our Team
Corporate
Mark S. Bergman Manuel S. Frey David S. Huntington
+44-20-7367-1601 212-373-3127 212-373-3124
mbergman@paulweiss.com mfrey@paulweiss.com dhuntington@paulweiss.com
Raphael M. Russo Jonathan H. Ashtor
212-373-3309 212-373-3823
rrusso@paulweiss.com jashtor@paulweiss.com
Litigation
Susanna M. Buergel Jessica S. Carey Roberto Finzi
212-373-3553 212-373-3566 212-373-3311
sbuergel@paulweiss.com jcarey@paulweiss.com rfinzi@paulweiss.com
Christopher D. Frey Roberto J. Gonzalez Jeannie S. Rhee
+81-3-3597-6309 202-223-7316 202-223-7466
cfrey@paulweiss.com rgonzalez@paulweiss.com jrhee@paulweiss.com
Richard C. Tarlowe Karen R. King
212-373-3035 212-373-3784
rtarlowe@paulweiss.com kking@paulweiss.com
Associates Jacobus J. Schutte, Anastasia V. Peterson, Marisa Seiss, Andrew J. Heffler, Deniz Gurbuz,
Patrick R. Kessock and Apeksha S. Vora contributed to this white paper.
© 2019 Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison LLP. In some jurisdictions, this publication may be considered attorney advertising. Past representations are
no guarantee of future outcomes.
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP 8
PAUL, WEISS, RIFKIND, WHARTON & GARRISON LLP
www.paulweiss.com

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/4weaver_death_of_cryptocurrency_final.pdf
DIGITAL FUTURE WHITEPAPER SERIES
The Death of Cryptocurrency
The Case for Regulation
Nicholas Weaver
Yale Law School Information Society Project / Nowhere to Hide /
December 2022
November 2022
Contents
I. Introduction .............................................................................................................. 1
II. The Theory of Cryptocurrency Payments and Digital Money ................................. 3
III. The Practice of Cryptocurrency Payments ............................................................... 7
IV. The Theory of Decentralization and Distributed Systems ...................................... 11
V. The Practice of Decentralization ............................................................................ 12
VI. The Theory of “Smart Contracts” and Programmable Money .............................. 15
VII. The Practice of “Smart Contracts” ......................................................................... 16
VIII. The Theory and Practice of DAOs and Join-Stock Companies ............................ 18
IX. The Theory and Practice of Stablecoins and Banknotes ........................................ 20
X. Regulatory Principles .............................................................................................. 22
XI. Regulating Tokens .................................................................................................. 23
XII. Regulating Cryptocurrency Exchanges ................................................................... 26
XIII. Regulating Stablecoins ............................................................................................ 28
XIV. Conclusions ............................................................................................................ 30
The Death of Cryptocurrency: The Case for
Regulation
I. Introduction
Over the past decade, the cryptocurrency space has seen a huge growth in interest. Despite
ten years of hype and a largely hands-off approach from regulators, however, the
technology has not yet revolutionized payments or other parts of the financial system. The
most ambitious attempted integration of cryptocurrency into the economy at-large thus
far was a spectacular failure: even when El Salvador adopted Bitcoin as a national currency
the project rapidly collapsed. Not only was the currency almost unused among the general
population, but when it was used it did not actually involve cryptocurrency transactions.
Cryptocurrencies will not and cannot form the basis of a revolution in our global financial
system.
Despite the repeated failures of major cryptocurrency projects, the space is seemingly
inescapable. Immense investments into cryptocurrency projects drive a hype cycle that
keeps promising a set of revolutions that are not materializing.
All of which leads to a major question: Why? Why, despite such time and freedom to
develop, have cryptocurrencies had so little impact on the financial system?
The answers are surprising. As I will argue throughout this essay, the truth about
cryptocurrencies is that they fail to accomplish nearly every objective they purportedly
were created to achieve. It may be that in the future, some new purpose for the
cryptocurrency ecosystem will emerge that will justify continued investment and
development of these technologies. But the catastrophic failures of nearly every major
cryptocurrency project—including the recent bankruptcy of cryptocurrency exchange
FTX—are not flukes.
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 1
Not only is the technology that underlies cryptocurrency not novel, these technologies are
deployed in ways that will inevitably result in unstable products that are fundamentally at
odds with the stated goals of the cryptocurrency and decentralized finance raison d’être:
They do not work as currency or a store of value. They are neither trustless nor
decentralized. They cannot create a new paradigm for the web, finance, and
micropayments. They are less secure in practice and more prone to widespread fraud than
our current financial system, and frequently result in irreversible consumer harm that could
have been mitigated using traditional financial processes.
This paper argues that the very nature of cryptocurrency technology ensures that current
cryptocurrency projects cannot actually succeed at their purported goals. Until and unless
the cryptocurrency community develops new objectives, or significantly alters
cryptocurrency technology to meet existing objectives, this mismatch between existing
means and desired ends will forever relegate cryptocurrency to the novelty, speculative
space that it currently occupies—good for a news headline but not for sea change in the
financial system.
Behind the veneer of new technology, cryptocurrencies reflect old economic phenomena
and paradigms; seemingly novel problems are addressable with existing regulations. Many
such existing regulations have explicit “duck tests”: if it looks like a duck, quacks like a
duck, and swims like a duck, it’s probably a duck. In most cases, the harms that
cryptocurrencies can cause are directly addressed by these existing frameworks, should
regulators both understand the technology and be willing to enforce existing regulations
against new fact patterns.
My argument takes place in four high-level sections. I will begin with a discussion of the
theory and practice of cryptocurrencies and other forms of “digital money,” explaining in
particular how cryptocurrencies function and what advantages they purport to have. Our
society has used digital money for over a generation. The novelty of cryptocurrency occurs
only in its exclusion of explicit intermediaries, creating a cash-like transaction process. At
the same time, these same mechanisms make cryptocurrencies fundamentally unsustainable
for payment systems.
Yale Information Society Project 2 2
Second, I will discuss the principle and practice of “decentralized” and “trustless” systems.
In decentralized systems, there are purportedly no intermediaries who can exert control
over the system. In “trustless” systems, it is presumed that the system is trustworthy without
having to trust any individual entity. But these claims do not hold water: in reality, systems
are neither decentralized nor trustless. As I will show, a few concentrated entities must be
trusted for the system to work; these entities in turn can exert significant control over the
system.
Third, I will discuss the theory and practice of “programmable money.” Advanced
cryptocurrencies like Ether (ETH) promise the ability to couple some amount of
computation to a transfer, enabling the creation of new financial instruments. However,
after two generations of experience in programmable money, it is clear that these products
are distinctly inferior to our existing systems.
Finally, I will discuss the social aspects of the use of cryptocurrencies. New structures called
“Decentralized Autonomous Organizations,” or DAOs, are structurally similar to a joint-
stock corporation despite supposedly novel voting mechanisms. The joint-stock
corporation is a legal and regulatory structure that has existed for hundreds of years. A
DAO which formally incorporates is simply a corporation, while a DAO which does not
is a general partnership, complete with joint and several liability. Both can be and should
be regulated under well-established corporate law rules.
This white paper concludes with a series of recommendations to policymakers, mostly
focused on how existing regulations can apply, should apply, and in some cases have
already applied to the space of cryptocurrencies. This includes regulating new issues of
cryptocurrencies, the existing cryptocurrency exchanges, and the stablecoins. Such
regulations should be imposed without fear of stifling innovation. As I will argue, there is,
at root, no true innovation currently present to stifle.
II. The Theory of Cryptocurrency Payments and Digital Money
Our modern economy runs on digital money: our “money” consists of entries in ledgers
maintained by trusted and regulated institutions. For decades we have used electronic
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 3
payments on a daily basis, using payment systems maintained by these regulated
intermediaries.
We trust these institutions because they are regulated and backed by explicit government
backstops like the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). There are extensive
regulatory frameworks that act to protect consumers and, in the end, the government and
the national economy as well. In our existing system, consumers are strongly protected
against fraudulent payments and against failing institutions.
These regulations also serve to protect the financial institutions themselves. Bank runs on
regulated banks effectively no longer happen, as there is no need for a consumer to rush
to the bank. So although the 2008 financial crisis resulted in many failing banks and
cascading crises, consumers were largely protected from failures by regulated institutions.
It was only the lesser-regulated shadow banks, such as the Reserve Money Market Fund
or AIG, that experienced bank runs.
These trusted intermediaries also provide reversibility. In case of fraud or other problems,
transactions can be undone for at least a limited period of time. This enables error
mitigation, as a human can intercede and fix what would otherwise be a potentially
catastrophic loss of funds.
There does exist a disadvantage to these regulated systems in that they require trusted
intermediaries. Especially for payments, these intermediaries both collect transaction fees
(for example, the net fee on a credit card purchase is roughly 1%-2%1) and also enforce
numerous regulations about what is allowed or disallowed.
The major exception to this regime is physical cash. Cash can be passed from person to
person without a third party needing to participate, collect fees, or enforce rules. But at
the same time, cash has significant disadvantages: the lack of reversibility means that theft
or errors are often unrecoverable, and the physical nature of cash places inherent limits on
the medium.
Cash both requires physical counterparty presence and takes up a considerable amount of
space. One million dollars in $100 bills weighs roughly 10 kilograms (22 pounds). So
Yale Information Society Project 4 4
although a million dollars can (just barely) fit in a briefcase, the resulting briefcase is heavy
and needs to be exchanged in person.
Although we still think of cash as money, it is remarkably divorced from our primary
payment channels. A business depositing cash has to invest in security, armored cars, and
other expenses not present in other forms of payments. A bank will commonly charge
0.25% just for processing cash due to the physical inconvenience.2 Our financial system is
also rife with cash-specific regulations to protect those who use it and deter crime: for
example, cash deposits over $10,000 are specifically reported by financial institutions who
must file Currency Transaction Reports.3
The idea behind Bitcoin, the first major cryptocurrency, was to enable electronic payments
that behave more like cash. In Bitcoin there purports to be no need to rely on trusted
intermediaries. Bitcoin transactions, like cash, are irreversible—but unlike cash, they are
electronic in nature.
Bitcoin, like any other electronic payment system, starts with a ledger of participants and
their balances. But unlike a conventional payment system, the participants are only
identified by their cryptographic public keys. This public key corresponds to a user’s
private key, which is simply a long random number. In Bitcoin’s case, it is 76-digits long.4
The private key is then used to create a corresponding public key, a random-looking
number that is also some 76-digits long.
These two keys allow the creation of a “public key signature.” The holder of the private
key, who we might call Alice,5 can take an arbitrary message and “sign it,” producing yet
another random looking, 76-digit-long number. Anyone else, who we might call Bob, can
then take that original message, signature, and public key and use this to validate the
signature. This validation confirms that the signature is applied to the original message and
that only someone who knew the private key could create the signature.
This forms the foundation of a Bitcoin transaction, which is effectively a digital check
signed by the sender. Thus for Alice to transfer 1.24 Bitcoin to Bob, Alice creates a digital
check: “I, Alice’s public key, pays Bob’s public key the sum of 1.24 Bitcoin, with a
transaction fee of 0.01 Bitcoin” and then cryptographically signs it. Now Bob can check
the public ledger to see if the check is good and then seek to get it published in the ledger.
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 5
Once published, everyone now knows that the balance associated with Alice’s key is now
decremented by 1.25 Bitcoin and Bob’s incremented by 1.24 Bitcoin.
The major difference between Bitcoin and previous systems is how the ledger itself is
managed. In conventional electronic payments, the ledger is managed and validated by the
trusted third parties: the bank, the payment processor, or other intermediary keeps a copy
of the ledger and can validate and include transactions.
But Bitcoin seeks to eliminate the costs and benefits of the trusted third parties by instead
managing the ledger publicly and collectively through what is known as the mining
process.
Anyone can theoretically become a Bitcoin miner. Miners gather up the currently
unvalidated checks, ensure that each check meets the rules,6 and assembles a block of new
checks. This block includes a pointer to the last block, creating the “blockchain” structure.
This system is not impenetrable: in particular, the system could be vulnerable to “double
spending” attacks, where someone replaces an already recorded check with a new valid
one. For example, instead of Alice’s check to Bob, Alice could have the miners change
history to instead include a check to herself.
The solution to this for Bitcoin is the proof-of-work system, which is designed to make
the cost of double-spending significantly more than the potential benefit. Each block
includes a large amount of useless work, but it is very easy to verify that the useless work
was done. The amount of useless work is automatically tuned, so it takes roughly ten
minutes for some miner to create the next valid block.
Anyone attempting to rewrite the last N blocks of history needs to do an equivalent amount
of useless work to rewrite history. While this doesn’t eliminate all possible double-
spending, it does economically eliminate all double-spending where the benefit of the
attack is less than the (time-consuming, expensive) work done in the interim.
The resulting system is a payment network where Alice and Bob no longer depend on an
identified intermediary. Instead, they rely on the collective work of the miners to update
the ledger. As a consequence, there is no single identifiable third party able to reverse or
Yale Information Society Project 6 6
block disallowed transactions. This is what cryptocurrency advocates mean when they
speak about a “decentralized,” “trustless” system.
III. The Practice of Cryptocurrency Payments
The irreversible design and volatile nature of most cryptocurrencies makes them unsuitable
for use as a payment channel for either domestic or international payments. The inherent
volatility of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin means that the recipient will, at some point,
need to convert from the cryptocurrency back to local currency, which in practice is a
huge drawback to the potential everyday use of a decentralized financial system. A receiver
seeking to minimize this risk will conduct the conversion almost immediately.
The conversion to a government-backed currency to avoid volatility is why, although
many companies have claimed to accept cryptocurrencies over the years, most do not
actually accept cryptocurrency in practice. Instead they use a service that allows them to
price their goods in dollars with an automatic conversion to present the price in Bitcoin or
other cryptocurrency.7 Then, when a payment is received, it is automatically converted to
dollars.
This means that the counterparty has to convert dollars to Bitcoin for the system to
balance. We will see later why irreversibility makes Bitcoin hard to buy, but even in the
best case, this means that a real-word cryptocurrency transaction requires two currency
conversion steps. Such currency conversion is generally expensive, as there are inevitably
fees incurred in such conversions.
Transactions with two currency conversion steps can become significantly more expensive
than conventional payment methods. Today, even an international transaction tends to at
most involve one currency conversion, rather than the two that are demanded by the use
of Bitcoin.
The irreversibility of cryptocurrencies also creates an incompatibility that makes
cryptocurrencies hard to buy due to increased cost of transaction between buyer and seller
necessary to increase safety where there are no trusted intermediaries. The normal financial
system relies on trusted intermediaries being capable of reversing transactions to mitigate
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 7
problems. Thefts, bugs, and other problems can be undone if detected in time.
Cryptocurrencies lack this critical feature. This is why cryptocurrency thefts, as a fraction
of the available currency, are orders of magnitude more common and severe than thefts in
the normal financial system.
The largest significant electronic bank heist, targeting the Bank of Bangladesh, managed
to steal roughly $100 million.8 Cryptocurrency hacks of similar magnitude are almost a
monthly occurrence; indeed, in the largest cryptocurrency hack on record, of Axie
Infinity’s “Ronin Bridge,” hackers stole over $600 million.9
This ease of theft is inherent in the very nature of cryptocurrency. Stealing $10 million in
physical cash requires that someone break into a secure location and move 100 kilograms
of physical paper. Stealing $10 million in a traditional bank transfer requires both breaking
into the bank’s computer and also quickly moving the money through a series of accounts
to hide its origin, such that the victim’s bank cannot undo the theft. Stealing $10 million
in cryptocurrency controlled by a computer, on the other hand, requires compromising
the computer but—critically—the victim can’t recover the money.10
This creates significant friction in buying cryptocurrencies. Someone who wishes to sell
cryptocurrencies cannot accept a conventional electronic payment. Instead they either have
to have an established relationship with the buyer (to know the buyer poses an acceptable
credit risk), accept cash, or accept an electronic payment and then wait for a few days.11
This drives up the price of buying cryptocurrency as all three options (validating credit
risk, accepting cache, or waiting) incur additional expenses not present in other payment
systems.
Furthermore, the actual cryptocurrency transactions themselves can be surprisingly
expensive.12 In order to act as a limit on spam transactions, where someone creates a huge
number of useless transitions that need to be validated, slowing down the transaction
verification process, any given cryptocurrency allows only a limited number of transactions
per block in the blockchain. When the desired number of transactions is below this
threshold, transactions are nearly free. But if the desired transaction rate exceeds this
threshold, then prices can spiral as a fee auction is used to select which transactions to
process due to the inelastic supply of available slots.
Yale Information Society Project 8 8
Bitcoin is particularly limited in this respect. Due to an early decision to limit spam by
restricting the block size to just one megabyte, the Bitcoin network can only process
somewhere between three and seven transactions per second worldwide. In comparison,
the typical load on the VISA network is 1,700 transactions per second, and VISA has tested
the system up to 64,000 transactions per second.
During times of congestion, this can lead to the price for Bitcoin transactions reaching $50
or more. Other cryptocurrencies may have higher limits, which naturally leads them to be
more vulnerable to spam. High congestion fees ensure that Bitcoin transactions can never
be used for everyday, low-value payments. It is inconceivable that consumers would be
willing to pay an extra $50 at the grocery store because they went shopping on a Saturday
or Sunday afternoon.
Cryptocurrency advocates will insist that “layer-two solutions” exist for this problem.
They will often point to the Bitcoin “Lightning Network,” a protocol implemented on top
of the underlying cryptocurrency, as an example of a solution. Unfortunately these don’t
solve the fundamental problem of limited transaction capacity.
Lightning works by creating a pre-funded payment channel between the user and a central
relayer.13 From there the user can issue or receive payments that pass through a chain of
relayers to the recipient. Eventually, a user may close the channel and receive the Bitcoin
back onto the main blockchain. Thus, the internal payments no longer need to be recorded
on the central blockchain.
In creating, adding funds, and closing the channel, the user still needs to conduct a normal
Bitcoin transaction. The Lightning network’s ability to create or close channels is limited
by Bitcoin’s own transaction limitations. Therefore, Lightning cannot provide scaling as
there is still a substantial limit on the number of channels that can be created, funded, or
closed per second.
The one example where Bitcoin did scale to a significant number of transactions was in El
Salvador, though it scaled, ironically, by not actually using Bitcoin to process payments.14
The dictator of El Salvador, President Nayib Bukele, passed a law mandating that Bitcoin,
along with the US dollar, would now be considered official currencies and merchants were
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 9
obligated to accept it. Along with the mandate came a phone application, the “Chivo
Wallet,” to enable El Salvadorian citizens to accept and spend Bitcoin payments.
Users were given 30 US dollars in Bitcoin when they signed up for a Chivo Wallet as a way
of attempting to drive usage.15 The system also included deep subsidies on gasoline when
purchased with Bitcoin.16 Critically, although there was an initial flurry of Bitcoin
transactions, the resulting transactions didn’t actually use Bitcoin’s ledger or even the
Lightning network.
Instead, Chivo acted like a decades-old centralized payment network: user balances were
simply updated in Chivo’s internal ledger, and Chivo acted as a trusted third party which
processed transactions. In sum, the one attempt to deploy a cryptocurrency payment
system on a national basis specifically did not use the cryptocurrency for most payments.
There was nothing decentralized or trustless about El Salvador’s Bitcoin experiment. For
the reasons described above, it is simply not conceivable for there to be a decentralized or
trustless system that is capable of handling payments at-scale. Increased frictions inherent
in the nature of cryptocurrency as alternative mechanisms to promote safety and security
will inevitably make any cryptocurrency-based system worse at handling transactions than
our current system—at least on an economy-wide scale.
There is one potential exception to this rule: the “stablecoin.” A stablecoin purports to
maintain a 1-to-1 value relationship with a conventional currency. There are actually
three different types of stablecoins, which I will discuss in detail in section VIII, but the
only viable sort, a “backed stablecoin,” requires a trusted intermediary—the very thing
cryptocurrencies are supposed to eliminate.
This trusted intermediary accepts conventional payments and issues a corresponding
amount of the stablecoin. The stablecoin instruments can circulate on their own until
someone else returns to the intermediary to receive the original amount of deposited
money. Mechanistically it resembles nothing more than a nineteenth century “free-bank
era” bank, just with cryptocurrency tokens instead of physical paper.
Of course, now that you have such a trusted intermediary, why can’t that trusted
intermediary simply maintain a trusted ledger to track everybody’s balance?
Yale Information Society Project 10 10
If cryptocurrencies are inferior to and more costly than our traditional financial systems,
what activities tend to occur with their use? Beyond speculation, cryptocurrencies serve as
an effective payment channel for items which would not be processed by the normal
payment channels, or where physical money is simply too bulky or restrictive to use.
Initially the primary use of Bitcoin for actual payments (rather than speculation) was the
purchase of drugs on the Silk Road (launched in 2011) and subsequent hidden-service
based markets. These markets at their peak conducted over $600,000 in sales a day.17 Since
annual US illicit drug sales are measured in the tens of billions, this means that the dark-
net markets only represented a couple percentage points of the total sales in the US,
showing that Bitcoin, even for illicit substances and with a decade of consumer experience,
is not a significantly useful alternative to cash.
Currently, the primary illicit use for cryptocurrency payments is multi-million-dollar
ransoms extorted by “big game ransomware” gangs. These criminal syndicates, commonly
operating out of Russia or North Korea, are estimated to obtain billions of dollars in
payments while doing perhaps ten times that in damage to the global economy.18 These
actors are blocked from conventional payment systems so Bitcoin and other
cryptocurrencies represent the only method available to collect these ransoms. As such,
I’ve previously described the ransomware problem as really a Bitcoin problem.19
In the end, despite a decade of hype and speculation, cryptocurrency has never served as a
viable alternative for payments that the existing system processes. The problems inherent
in volatile cryptocurrencies are simply fundamental to the design, while any viable
stablecoin requires a trusted intermediary, the very actor cryptocurrencies were supposed
to eliminate.
IV. The Theory of Decentralization and Distributed Systems
Cryptocurrency advocates claim that the underlying technology offers a huge advantage
over existing systems through “decentralization,” with hundreds or thousands of systems
all acting independently but creating and maintaining a common view of the world.20 They
also claim that the result is “trustless” systems where you don’t need to trust particular
actors, but instead only the resulting system.
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 11
For a generation we have successfully built distributed (also sometimes termed federated)
systems. In a distributed or federated system, we have a collection of named and identified
actors. Within the system, these actors are explicitly trusted within their limited sphere of
operation. In some cases, we only need to trust that a subset of the actors are honest, but
in others we delineate where each entity is trusted, with authority within their bailiwick
but no authority outside of it.
As an example, modern payment systems are a distributed system. In the Automated
Clearing House system, each bank maintains its own set of customer balances and is
trusted to act on behalf of those customers. Participating banks can then send messages to
other banks, and because the banks are pre-identified and trusted, the system can
efficiently transfer money between these known actors. Distributed systems critically
expose the trust relationships: you have to trust your bank, the recipient’s bank, and the
intermediate payment processor for the system to work. These systems can scale to
immense size.21
The major difference between decentralized and distributed systems is that decentralized
systems forgo identifying and restricting who can participate. In a distributed system, the
entities are all vetted and trusted to at least some degree, and these entities are also therefore
identifiable and identified and have various rights and responsibilities. In a decentralized
system, anyone can participate without needing to confirm their identity with some trusted
party. This also contributes to claims that such decentralized systems are “trustless”: a
participant can be assured that the system will work even if some fraction of the unknown
participants are bad actors.
V. The Practice of Decentralization
In the end, all decentralized systems rely on some form of a voting scheme to decide the
current state of the world. Indeed, all such systems have some notion of the state of the
world. If one party thinks “Alice paid Bob” is what should be recorded, but another thinks
“Alice paid Carol” should be recorded, there needs to be a mechanism for all participants
to end up agreeing. And in the end this usually requires some sort of vote: All the
participants effectively vote on the question “Who did Alice pay?” and the majority vote
wins.
Yale Information Society Project 12 12
The biggest problem faced by decentralized systems is thus the threat of what are known
as “Sybils.” A Sybil is simply a fake participant, where a single actor creates hundreds or
even millions of fake participants to gain a larger share of any “one man, one vote” type
system using a “vote early, vote often” strategy. Distributed systems do not face the same
problem as the identification of the participants implicitly eliminates the possibility of
Sybils.
Thus a cryptocurrency needs to rely on “proof of something” in order to limit Sybils by
imposing a cost on each vote. The method pioneered by Bitcoin is “proof of work”: the
approval of a set of transactions includes a cryptographic hash.
Cryptographic hash functions take an arbitrary message and produce a smaller number,
in this case a number that appears to be randomly chosen between 0 and approximately
1076, so another 76-digit number. A key property of the hash function is that although it
is deterministic (the same input will always produce the same output), if you change just
a single letter in the input the output looks like a completely different random number.
So if a bunch of participants take an input, add on a little message, and repeatedly hash
the value until one finds a combination of the input and their additional message where
the hash ends with 18 zeros in base 10, this shows that the system as a whole probably
had to compute one quintillion hashes just to find one that matched. While the operation
of finding a matching hash is costly, anyone can verify that the resulting input and message
match by conducting just a single hash.
This is used by Bitcoin to protect history or “the state of the world.” If someone wants to
present an alternate history as valid, they have to do at least as much (otherwise useless)
work as was used to create the initial record of history. The implication is that would be
so costly as to make creating that alternate history unworthwhile for an attacker.
Unfortunately, this is not an efficient means of dealing with Sybils.
If an attacker can spend X over a fixed period of time to change history to gain Y dollars,
they will do so if X < Y and won’t if X > Y. But the defenders have to be consuming X in
that period of time whether or not they are under attack. As a consequence, proof of work
can never be both efficient and effective: if X is low the system is vulnerable to attack, and
if X is high there is simply a huge amount of wasted work needed to protect the system
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 13
24/7/365. There have been many variants on “proof of wasting X” in terms of
cryptocurrencies but all end up suffering from the same flaw: proof-of-waste systems
cannot be both efficient and secure.
Proof-of-work systems also inevitably converge into a system where a few entities control
the majority vote of the network. This is due to basic economic competition: the more
efficient entities (where wasting X resources is cheaper) will quickly dominate the market,
expanding the share of resources they are wasting until they account for most of the
available profit.
As of this writing, five entities control 75% of the vote on the Bitcoin blockchain.22 These
entities need to be trusted for the system to work properly as they possess an absolute veto
over any transaction they might not desire to occur.
The largest proposed alternative, proof-of-stake, instead seeks to formally enshrine a
plutocracy, as one’s voting share is proportional to one’s holdings of the underlying
cryptocurrency. Although this doesn’t have the efficiency issues with proof of work, it does
make the system explicitly dependent on the trustworthiness of the biggest participants.
This problem is further compounded by the strong inequality in most cryptocurrencies. In
the end a few participants, either early participants and/or major cryptocurrency
exchanges, hold most of the available cryptocurrency. Thus in practice only a few
participants, taken together, have the majority vote in such “decentralized” systems.
Ethereum, which successfully transitioned to proof-of-stake, has over 50% (and thus the
majority vote) of the network controlled by just four entities.23
Finally, a lot of “decentralized” cryptocurrencies actually are not decentralized in practice.
Instead they use a structure where there is some set of trusted validators created at the start
and these validators are the ones responsible for maintaining a coherent state of the world.
Such systems are really just distributed systems, using the term “decentralized” to hide their
actually centralized nature.
As discussed above, in all of these decentralized systems, trust relationships continue to
exist but are hidden and obscured. Cryptocurrency participants need to trust the code that
runs their wallets, the exchanges where they trade their cryptocurrencies, the miners who
Yale Information Society Project 14 14
maintain the public ledger, and the developers who code the cryptocurrency itself. In short,
the number and type of trusted entities is actually greater than a conventional system,
though each actor has less accountability due to a lack of formal regulation of these actors
and the deliberate obfuscation of these actors’ roles.
These actors have shown themselves unworthy of trust in the past. Flaws and bugs in
cryptocurrency wallets regularly result in theft or loss.24 Cryptocurrency exchanges have a
long history of failing with little recompense for customers.25 Cryptocurrency miners have
deliberately distorted the process to the detriment of other participants,26 and developers
will change the code in ways that favor the developers over other users.27
The repeated bad behavior of actors necessary to a decentralized system results in systems
that aren’t actually “trustless.” Most cryptocurrencies have a small cartel of miners or
validators which can effectively control the system. Is there an actual benefit in
“decentralization” when four to ten identifiable entities have a supermajority vote and can
completely control the system?
VI. The Theory of “Smart Contracts” and Programmable Money
Another promise of the cryptocurrency space is to enable “programmable money”: instead
of simply having our money be a passive ledger, we can program actions to occur based
on events. This claim neglects that we’ve had such systems for generations.
Just as society has had digital money for over two generations, our society has used
programmable money for nearly as long. In 1975, what became the Vanguard 500 Index
Fund was launched. Unlike previous mutual funds, where trades were directed by humans,
the Vanguard 500 effectively implemented a small program to match the S&P 500 Index.
Since that time, Wall Street has launched thousands of systems based on programmable
stock trading. An entire subindustry of high-frequency trading has sprung up, using
computer programs for “picking up pennies from in front of a steamroller” to remarkable
financial success. Our modern financial system runs on computer programs that use money
as an input and do things on our behalf—there’s nothing new about programmable money.
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 15
In theory, cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum, which enable “smart contracts,” are intended
to replicate the functionality that already exists within our financial system within the
cryptocurrency space. A user can deploy a small program written in a domain-specific
programming language that can interact with the underlying blockchain.
Backers of the cryptocurrencies claim that this can enable a whole host of new innovations,
from “web3” to decentralized financial operations. In all this they promise both security
and a lack of gatekeepers: no third party can interfere thanks to the widely distributed
nature of the underlying cryptocurrency. They also promise to be more “democratic,” as
anyone can write such programs, rather than just the major participants in the financial
markets.
VII. The Practice of “Smart Contracts”
In practice, these smart contracts have proven to be a disaster. Unlike the programmable
money that runs our society, smart contracts have two massive defects: they run on an
irreversible fabric and are open to the world for potential exploitation.
The first is subtle but critical. If a modern financial program experiences widespread
failure, there is a strong possibility that transactions can be reversed if caught in time.28 So
although it is important for such code to be (mostly) free of bugs, at least some level of
error can be tolerated as the reversible nature of modern financial systems enables bug
remediation.
Such remediation is absent in smart contracts. If a smart contract has a bug that causes a
loss of value, there is no remedy unless the underlying blockchain is updated to undo the
effects. This has regularly resulted in multi-million-dollar losses, such as the case of the
Parity multisignature wallet.
The Parity wallet, whose lead developer invented the smart-contract language used, was
an attempt to secure the underlying Ethereum cryptocurrency by creating multiparty
checks: an attacker would need to steal multiple keys to steal the cryptocurrency rather
than one. Unfortunately there was a bug in the wallet where someone inadvertently
Yale Information Society Project 16 16
disabled the entire contract, locking some hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of ETH
in a way that they can never be recovered short of Ethereum deploying a code update.
Not only is an irreversible fabric a natural target for theft, the “attack surface” of these
smart contracts is vastly more open than other financial systems. Even with reversibility, a
bank or stock exchange would not dream of opening up their infrastructure to allow
anyone to attempt to hack the system. But the whole point of a smart contract is that it is
public: anyone can see the compiled code, observe what it is supposed to do, and interact
with it both through the official interface and any unprotected subfunctions.
The result is naturally that smart contracts are regularly exploited by attackers who take
advantage of logical inconsistencies in the code. Million dollar thefts are almost a daily
occurrence,29 as any vulnerability will attract a host of anonymous attackers and there are
many potential vulnerabilities in the code.
This raises the question: “If a smart contract is a contract, and the terms allow an attacker
to take the cryptocurrency, is it actually theft?” Of course the question is rhetorical—the
backers of various cryptocurrencies will exhort that code is law up until their
cryptocurrency is stolen.
Finally, the “computer” these smart contracts actually execute on is remarkably poor. The
entire Ethereum “global computer” has effectively 0.02% the computational power of a
$45 Raspberry Pi 4, as there are a limited number of computations actually performed
and, since all the miners are effectively running the same program, different miners aren’t
actually doing any more useful computation.
So what are smart contracts actually used for? The most common use is for creating
“Decentralized Autonomous Organizations” (DAOs), non-fungible tokens (NFTs),
“web3,” and as the primary fabric for various “Decentralized Finance” (DeFi) systems.
DeFi systems mostly take three forms: decentralized exchanges, lending protocols, and
yield farming. A decentralized exchange is simply an automated market maker, or a
program that matches buyers and sellers using some level of reserve, for some token
representing a DAO or other investment. This serves as an alternative to listings on
conventional cryptocurrency exchanges. Normal cryptocurrency exchanges do at least
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 17
some vetting, but there is no vetting needed for adding an asset to one of these decentralized
exchanges: an anonymous user just needs to provide some assets to create a liquidity pool.
Lending protocols are funded by participants to create an automated pool of
cryptocurrencies. Someone else can then provide collateral and obtain a loan from the
pool. Such lending protocols tend to be a mechanism to increase leverage in the
cryptocurrency system. If prices go down, the pool will then automatically liquidate the
collateral. Lending protocols are mostly used to increase leverage in the system, or for
“flash loans”: loans that only exist for a single transaction. Flash loans are used to exploit
other DeFi projects that need a lot of funding for a single transaction but can return the
funds when the exploitation is complete.
Finally, yield farming describes a large host of DeFi protocols where a user invests some
amount of cryptocurrency in return for promised gains later on. At bottom, most of these
yield-farming systems end up recapitulating a Ponzi scheme: there is no positive-sum
activity for these yield farms to actually invest in, so they tend to create additional tokens
to pay off previous investors.
The most famous such yield farming was the “Anchor Protocol” on the Luna blockchain.
The Terra stablecoin was used to invest in this yield farm, obtaining some promised returns
of 20% APY. These returns were, in the end, generated by creating more Terra, effectively
creating a Ponzi scheme that destroyed some billions of dollars’ worth of value.30
VIII. The Theory and Practice of DAOs and Join-Stock
Companies
Most modern corporations are effectively autonomous organizations. There is a group of
managers in charge of day-to-day operations who receive a salary or other compensation.
The shareholders themselves can collectively vote on proposals on how the company
should be governed and can even override management when it acts in an undesired way.
This basic concept—of a voting, collective ownership that directs management in company
operations, with the voting owners receiving payments from the corporation’s profits—is
an idea that has existed for at least half a millennia. These corporations receive substantial
Yale Information Society Project 18 18
legal protections: it is the corporation itself, and neither the management nor the owners,
that are usually liable for corporate activity. But, in return, corporations also have
obligations. These obligations are heightened for any corporation that wishes to be publicly
traded, which needs to perform substantial disclosures to comply with security regulations.
Properly registered corporations also provide a liability shield: it is the corporation, not
the individual investors, who are liable if the corporation misbehaves.
A DAO is an attempt to replicate this corporate structure but using an existing
cryptocurrency as the fabric for voting. The DAO issues a set of “governance tokens.”
Possessing the governance token, at minimum, indicates a form of ownership that conveys
voting rights in the DAO’s activity.
The only major difference between a DAO and a modern joint-stock corporation is the
paperwork. A DAO may or may not have a corporate parent created as a limited-liability
corporation, but the DAO token itself is effectively never registered as a security.
DAOs operate their governance tokens in similar ways to the securities of a corporation.
Importantly, governance tokens are offered in a way that is designed to create a secondary
market where participants can actively trade the token beyond the initial set of people who
received the token from the DAO.
The result is the commercialization of “securities fraud by proxy.” A venture capital firm
invests in a blockchain-related startup. This startup will then issue either a “governance”
token (which represents an interest in the startup) or a “utility” token (which represents a
promise of a future product from the startup), and the venture firm gets a large share of
these new tokens.
The governance token represents an unregulated security, where the investors gain a vote
and presumably a share of the profits. Utility tokens are instead a security in disguise:
investors did not buy “dentacoin” to go to the dentist,31 but instead in the hope that the
Dentacoin service eventually launches and others will buy dentacoin to actually use.
Now the venture firm sells the tokens they obtained, either through a centralized exchange
or on a DeFi exchange. This allows the venture firm to profit from their investment without
needing to create a viable-enough company to withstand the mandatory disclosures
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 19
involved in a normal securities sale. And if the SEC ever enforces, it was the company they
invested in, not the VC firm itself, that evaded a near century of securities law.
IX. The Theory and Practice of Stablecoins and Banknotes
During a large portion of the 1800s, the US did not possess a paper currency and did not
have a central bank. During the “Free Bank Era,” the US government only issued money
in the form of coins. Physical coins, although always acceptable at face value, were
inconveniently heavy. A $1 silver dollar weighed 26 grams, while a $20 gold piece weighed
a similar 33 grams.
During this era, state-chartered banks would accept coinage and in return issue paper
notes. The paper note represented a bearer asset—anyone with the note was assumed to
have ownership over the noted amount of currency, and the bearer of the note was entitled
to return to a branch of that particular bank to retrieve an appropriate amount of physical
coins (“specie”).
This system, however, had problems, notably “wildcat banks.” A wildcat bank would issue
banknotes that, through either mismanagement or deliberate action, were not actually
backed by specie held in the bank. Stories abound of banks either showing state regulators
barrels full of scrap covered with a layer of coins, or covertly moving barrels of coins
between branches ahead of regulator inspections.
Backed stablecoins literally recapitulate the model of the free bank era. A stablecoin issuer
such as Tether or Circle will accept a deposit from a “customer” and return them an
equivalent amount of the stablecoin. This stablecoin is now a digital bearer asset, it can be
arbitrarily transferred to others identified only by their public keys. Eventually, someone
can then take that stablecoin and redeem it at the issuer for the underlying deposit value.
Most centralized cryptocurrency exchanges are actually cut off from the global banking
system, while the decentralized exchanges naturally have no banking ties. Thus the
stablecoins became the unit of account in most cryptocurrency exchanges, with some
exchanges effectively turning all real-money deposits into stablecoin deposits.
Yale Information Society Project 20 20
There are two major problems with these backed stablecoins. First, stablecoin issuers claim
that their only customers are those who issue or redeem the stablecoins in the first instance,
so they don’t perform anti-money-laundering checks on the vast majority of stablecoin
users. Second, the behavior of the major issuers, Tether and Circle, suggests that each is
acting as a wildcat bank—and there is little to prevent additional wildcat banks from
opening in the future.
The money laundering concerns with stablecoins are, so far, mostly theoretical. The on-
ramps and off-ramps to the normal banking system for these stablecoins is limited, which
acts as a cap on current potential criminal use. Similarly, stablecoins are not actually used
in commerce but tend to only be used as a stable value on cryptocurrency exchanges,
limiting their value for money-laundering purposes. But this could change if companies
provide easier on-ramps to convert dollars into stablecoins.
The “wildcat bank” nature, however, is far less theoretical. Between Bitcoin’s price peak
on November 8, 2021, and September 1, 2022, the stablecoin Circle issued $17 billion in
new circle. At roughly the same time, Coinbase saw that customer cash on deposit fell
from $10 billion to $7 billion. The blockchain-nature of these stablecoins shows the
amount issued, but offers no validation that the issued stablecoins are backed by actual
funding.
For Circle’s issued stablecoin to be fully backed directly implies that some $17 billion in
new money was invested into the cryptocurrency space, during a massive bear market that
saw Bitcoin drop from $67,000 to $20,000, and that this new money did not want to use
a regulated exchange like Coinbase but instead wished to trade on unregulated exchanges.
Similarly, there is substantial evidence that the price bubbles seen in both 2017 and 2021
were largely driven by the issuance of new tether, as Tether printed billions of new coin.32
The only alternative to Tether recklessly printing unbacked coin would be if tens of billions
of new dollars flowed into the cryptocurrency space, sent by investors who wished to avoid
the banked and regulated exchanges—exchanges that are regulated specifically to protect
investors against deliberate manipulation.
There are two other classes of stablecoins: overcollateralized stablecoins and algorithmic
stablecoins, although these two are less significant. In an overcollateralized stablecoin, such
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 21
as DAI, a participant will transfer a significant amount of cryptocurrency (say $15,000 at
current price) and receive $10,000 worth of the stablecoin. These stablecoins then tend to
be used to buy more cryptocurrency, creating a cycle of increased leverage, but have
enough volatility to not be a true stablecoin because of the potential for a down-market
unwinding collapsing the system.
Finally, algorithmic stablecoins couple a stablecoin with a volatile cryptocurrency. If the
value of the stablecoin drops below a dollar, one can turn the stablecoin into the volatile
cryptocurrency and make a “profit”; similarly if the stablecoin is above a dollar, one can
turn the volatile cryptocurrency back into the stablecoin.
These stablecoins inevitably fail. The most recent major example, Terra/Luna, claimed to
offer 20% rates of return on the Terra stablecoin within the Anchor lending pool before
collapsing in a matter of days. The result was a classic Ponzi scheme: there were no actual
borrowers willing to pay 20% interest so the gains were paid from other investors. When
it collapsed, destroying a notional billion dollars of investor value, it caused many follow-
on collapses as many cryptocurrency “investment” firms that were simply running Ponzi-
pass-through funds were subject to additional investor scrutiny.33
X. Regulatory Principles
By now, it should be clear that the cryptocurrency space is not novel and cannot improve
our existing financial system in a meaningful way. Instead, most innovations in the
cryptocurrency space involve recapitulating the real financial system, overlaying it with a
surfeit of historical frauds and failures, and disguising this by means of technobabble.
Our existing system is not free of problems, but these problems are not due to a lack of
regulation. People complain about their bank or brokerage firm, but they don’t complain
that the regulations creating the FDIC and SIPC protect them from loss should their bank
fail. Regulated stock exchanges don’t wash trade against their customers, and insider
traders and Ponzi scammers face meaningful risk of prosecution.
Fortunately most of the regulations constructed to deal with the cryptocurrency-related
failures are also old, and most implement a “duck test”: if it looks like a duck, quacks like
Yale Information Society Project 22 22
a duck, and swims like a duck, it’s probably a duck. Thus, in regulating cryptocurrency
activity, it is best to look past the technology and instead understand the systemic behavior
that needs regulation. We already have the legal tools we need to create meaningful
regulation of the cryptocurrency space.
XI. Regulating Tokens
As previously discussed, cryptocurrencies don’t work for legal, above-the-board
payments. Instead the legal use is restricted almost exclusively to a speculative casino where
participants bet on whether the value of things like the Shiba Inu token goes up or down.
Almost all of these speculative “assets” are zero-sum: every dollar “earned” is at the
expense of some other participant. This nature is why I describe the system as a “self-
assembled Ponzi scheme.”
Newly released cryptocurrencies and related items generally fall into at least one of four
categories: new “L1 cryptocurrencies,” “utility tokens,” “governance tokens,” and “non-
fungible tokens.” But all except NFTs are securities under existing US law, correctly
understood according to some principles I discuss here; indeed, arguably many NFT
releases are also securities.
A new L1 cryptocurrency is simply a new blockchain with a new associated
cryptocurrency. The promoter of the cryptocurrency creates a new network, arranges for
at least some computers to validate, and then attempts to sell the tokens to others
promising that the cryptocurrency somehow has an innate value. We previously discussed
how “utility tokens” and “governance tokens” work in the context of various DAOs: they
represent either a future service or a voting share in the corporate structure.
Finally there are “non-fungible tokens” (NFTs), which represent a nebulous ownership
interest in a “unique” item, such as a URL pointing to an image. These are usually sold as
collectables, akin to digital baseball cards, with some offering additional rights such as a
license to produce derivative works or access to membership-only events.
All but the NFTs clearly fall under the SEC’s ambit as they pass the Howey Test, which
emerges from the Supreme Court’s holding in SEC v. W.J. Howey Co.34 This test defined
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 23
“investment contract” for the purpose of regulation under the Securities Act of 1933 and
is a prototypical duck test: “In other words, an investment contract for purposes of the
Securities Act means a contract, transaction or scheme whereby a person invests his money
in a common enterprise and is led to expect profits solely from the efforts of the promoter
or a third party, it being immaterial whether the shares in the enterprise are evidenced by
formal certificates or by nominal interests in the physical assets employed in the
enterprise.”35
Whether a newly issued token purports to provide a new blockchain, some direct utility,
or governance interest in a shared enterprise, they inevitably act as an “investment of
money in a common enterprise with a reasonable expectation of profits to be derived from
the efforts of others.”36 This logic is no different than the ownership of the collectively
managed orange trees in Florida which were the subject of SEC v. W.J. Howey Co., the
case from which the test derives.
Even many NFT projects should trigger the Howey Test, as the “art” is not being collected
for the sake of the art, but on the belief that someone else will pay more for the NFT as a
result of activity done by the group promoting the NFT. The group behind the NFT usually
promises to produce some sort of “metaverse” project where the NFTs will provide access.
So the future value of the NFT specifically depends on future action of others while those
buying the NFT are seeking an investment.
A significant problem, however, is that the SEC has previously taken a hands-off approach
when regulating these obvious securities. The SEC mostly seems to intervene only in the
case when the security fails, with the notable exception of Telegram and their “TON”
token.37 The SEC must take a more proactive approach to regulation of these clear
securities.
The SEC should start by reminding the cryptocurrency community that newly issued
tokens, unless formally specified otherwise, fall under the Howey Test. The SEC did this
in general with the original “DAO” report,38 concerning the collapsed Ethereum investment
fund, but has not been subsequently proactive. The report makes clear that most of these
schemes satisfy the requirements set forth by the Howey Test and thus should be registered
as securities. But amidst a flurry of various token releases, often backed by major venture
capital companies, the SEC generally takes no action unless the release fails.
Yale Information Society Project 24 24
The lack of widespread proactive prosecution means that promoters can simply play the
odds. If the SEC does not reliably enforce the rules, promoters can simply issue tokens and
hope to get away with it. This problem is magnified by the presence of venture capitalists
(VCs). VCs invest in companies that issue tokens and then sell the tokens as unlicensed
securities. Even if the SEC eventually prosecutes the token issuer, the VCs that support and
incentivize the continuation of this system are protected from SEC regulation. After all, the
VC did not issue the unregulated security.
Instead of waiting for the collapse of a particular token, the SEC should send out what
amounts to a “Wells-Notice-Lite,” a formal reminder that the proposed issuance is an
unregistered security and that if the issuer doesn’t recall the issue, the SEC will proactively
prosecute.
Additionally, when the issuer is an informal DAO rather than a formal corporation, the
SEC should remind the participants that in the absence of a formal corporate structure, a
DAO acts as a partnership, a legal structure where the participants face joint and several
liability.39 This is a particularly impactful reminder when DAOs are formed to operate
unregulated stock exchanges, money laundering systems, or other activity that would be
illegal in a conventional manner.
Finally, for the few who are not dissuaded, the SEC should file suit immediately to make
it clear that this is not a bluff but a change in enforcement priority. Taken together, these
methods of SEC enforcement should generally reduce the problem of newly issued tokens
detrimentally affecting retail investors.
Existing tokens, however, still remain a significant problem. There are simply too many
that have been issued over the years for the SEC to meaningfully protect investors from
these existing unregistered securities. Current enforcement priority needs to stop the further
issuance of unregistered securities. But they do serve an important lever for regulating the
cryptocurrency exchanges to protect consumer interests even in the absence of direct action
against the issuers.
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 25
XII. Regulating Cryptocurrency Exchanges
Cryptocurrency exchanges take three forms: lightly regulated exchanges with banking ties,
unregulated offshore exchanges without significant bank connections, and decentralized
exchanges that operate directly as a combination of a smart contract and a web page.
The lightly regulated exchanges must be more heavily regulated. There are only a few in
the US (notably Coinbase, Kraken, Gemini, and, until recently, FTX-US), and they have
devolved over the years.
To begin with, these exchanges are acting as broker/dealers—after all, their pitch is that
individuals are “investing” in cryptocurrencies. Thus they should be regulated like
broker/dealers. They need to be clearly under the SEC and FINRA (the Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority) and mandated to carry SIPC insurance.
Coinbase is one of the oldest, largest, and most reputable exchanges operating in the US.
Coinbase has shifted from an exchange that only listed a few cryptocurrencies that one
could argue should be treated as commodities to an exchange that lists over 200+
cryptocurrencies, most of which explicitly trigger the Howey Test in their marketing
materials. After all, if “staking” a token is supposed to earn an interest rate of 20%, it is
clearly acting as a security contract.
In a recent lawsuit against a Coinbase insider who was performing insider trading, the SEC
in its complaint explicitly listed over half a dozen cryptocurrencies that clearly acted as
investment contracts, pointing explicitly to statements from the particular
cryptocurrencies’ promoters.40 Coinbase’s response was a blanket denial, claiming they
categorically do not actually list any securities on their exchange.
The SEC should continue the process. The SEC should go through every listing for all
exchanges that support US customers, document how each particular token satisfies the
Howey Test, and then actively challenge the exchanges in court for acting as
broker/dealers that facilitate the sale of unregistered securities. This would have multiple
benefits, including both consumer protection and disrupting the modern business of
securities fraud by proxy.
Yale Information Society Project 26 26
Increased consumer protection would follow from the requirements that a stock broker
and exchange need to follow. Currently, a Coinbase or other cryptocurrency exchange
customer in case of bankruptcy is simply an unsecured creditor.41 If their account gets
compromised, they lack any form of consumer protection.
If cryptocurrency exchanges wish to behave as investment vehicles for the general public,
they should abide by the requirements we apply to banks, brokers, and exchanges to
protect consumers in the case of insolvency or computer security compromises.
The offshore exchanges represent two additional problems which need further regulatory
action: money-laundering risks and blatant market manipulation.
The money-laundering risk arises from accounts with weak or nonexistent “Know Your
Customer” (KYC) and “Anti-Money Laundering” (AML) controls that are actively used
to perform “chain swaps” to hide criminal activity. In a chain swap, a weak KYC account
is funded with one cryptocurrency. The bad agent then uses that to buy a different
cryptocurrency, and then withdraws the second cryptocurrency. This is commonly used to
break the traceability of stolen cryptocurrency.
These offshore exchanges are also notorious for active market manipulation, including
both wash trading and front running. The presence of these markets and the indirect
coupling with the regulated exchanges represents a substantial threat to market regularity.
Some of the exchanges, notably FTX42 and Crypto.com, have “independent” US
subsidiaries. These subsidiaries should not be allowed to operate in the US while their
corporate parents continue to operate unregulated offshore exchanges. Not only should
these exchanges be brought under the same regulatory-type structure of a domestic stock
exchange, they should also be required to ensure that their offshore parents meet both
KYC/AML requirements and block blatant market manipulation.
As for the exchanges without ties to the US, a key lever will be enforcing the “Travel
rule”43—regulations requiring that the sender and receiver are documented. The foreign
exchanges which do not enforce the travel rule should effectively be cut off from
transferring cryptocurrency to and from US exchanges, effectively segregating the market.
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 27
The final question is how to regulate the “autonomous, decentralized exchanges” that exist
on Ethereum and other platforms. It starts with the observation that absent a corporate
structure, a DAO is simply a partnership and all partners have joint and several liability.
This means that those “investing” in Uniswap, the biggest of these decentralized exchanges,
are themselves liable for the securities-law violations that occur every day on that
platform. And if there is a corporate parent, then the corporate parent bears direct
responsibility for enforcing securities laws on the “decentralized” platform.
But these decentralized exchanges have another hazard: automatic front running by the
cryptocurrency miners themselves. Front running is illegal behavior on the part of an
exchange, where the exchange observes a user’s intended trade and conducts its own first,
designed to benefit the exchange at the cost of the user.
In decentralized exchanges, a user’s transaction is the atomic unit. But from the miner’s
viewpoint, it is a group of transactions. Miners will automatically construct the group of
transactions to automatically front run the normal trader, a process known as “Miner
Extractible Value.”
This would clearly be illegal in a normal exchange, but this appears to be accepted in the
cryptocurrency space. Fortunately most of the miners for Ethereum have a US nexus, and
the Ethereum switch to proof-of-stake also has a significant US nexus. Any block
producer who extracts MEV by actively trading against market participants is failing to
properly operate the decentralized exchange as an actual exchange.
XIII. Regulating Stablecoins
The final area that needs substantial regulation is the backed stablecoins.44 In the end, the
backed stablecoins like Tether and Circle are the foundation upon which the entire edifice
of unregulated exchanges are built. Eliminate the problematic nature of these stablecoins
and you eliminate much of the entire space’s problems.
The philosophy for regulating stablecoins should be straightforward: all users of a
stablecoin are considered customers of the stablecoin issuer for all relevant money
transmission regulations. All transfers of stablecoin balances between customers are
Yale Information Society Project 28 28
facilitated in part by the stablecoin issuer acting as a money transmitter. This may already
be the case legally but it needs to be formally clarified, either directly by the regulators or
by a legal change from Congress.
This would require just a minor technical change for the stablecoin’s underlying smart
contract. Instead of allowing the stablecoin to be transmitted between arbitrary individuals,
the code should be modified to only allow transfers between individual public keys vetted
by the stablecoin issuer. Registering the vetting is simply a cryptographic signature, a proof
that a certain key is authorized to use the stablecoin created by the stablecoin issuer.
It would however require that the issuer conduct due diligence on its users, which will
substantially increase operational cost. But why should a stablecoin issuer be exempt from
the basic due diligence that any other payment processor is legally obligated to conduct?
In a single stroke this change would have multiple substantial benefits, including making
it clear that Tether is subject to US jurisdiction, eliminating a potential money laundering
threat, and disrupting the entire ecology of unbanked exchanges.
Currently, Tether maintains an assertion that they are exempt from US regulation because
their only “customers” are the few corporations allowed to purchase new tether or redeem
tether. Tether has even advertised this as a feature, suggesting that Iran should use tether
to evade US sanctions.
This lack of ties to the US is clearly a fiction. Tether can be purchased on both the Coinbase
and Kraken cryptocurrency exchanges and then transferred off for US speculators using
DeFi or unregulated exchanges.45 But making it clear that Tether’s “customers” are the
users, not just the purchasers, makes the ties explicit.
It would also prevent both Tether and Circle from becoming significant vehicles for money
laundering. As a business, both Tether and Circle recapitulate many features of Liberty
Reserve, a prior digital currency shut down by criminal prosecution by the Department of
Justice.46 Currently the stablecoins are not used for purchasing significant amounts of
goods or services, but if they were to be used outside of cryptocurrency then they would
probably find themselves like Liberty Reserve: the de-facto currency for online criminality.
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 29
The US Department of Justice disagreed with Liberty Reserve’s similar assertions of
exemption from US jurisdiction and successfully prosecuted those behind Liberty Reserve.
Liberty Reserve deliberately did not vet the users of the currency and as a consequence
became a center for online criminal-to-criminal payments. The notion should be rejected
that using a pseudonymous public ledger,47 as Tether does, rather than a confidential
private database, as Liberty Reserve did, absolves the stablecoin issuer of the liability
Liberty Reserve faced. After all, the only major difference between the two is how the
records are maintained.
Vetting stablecoin users should also substantially disrupt the unbanked exchanges. Since
the unbanked exchanges are clearly acting outside of existing regulatory frameworks but
rely on the stablecoins as a unit of account, the stablecoin issuers should clearly not allow
the unbanked exchanges to act as customers of the stablecoin.
Given these unbanked exchanges’ weak KYC/AML controls, they would likely not pass
muster with even the most cursory due diligence. After all, if these unbanked exchanges
could pass such diligence, they wouldn’t be unbanked; instead they would have ties to the
normal financial system that eliminate the need for using stablecoins.
These unbanked exchanges really are, in reality, more akin to acting as a casino for
cryptocurrency, where participants can bet on whether a number goes up. But as casinos
they need chips, units of account that are stable for participants. The stablecoins are what
provide this facility for exchanges otherwise cut off from conventional banking. If an
exchange is not served by conventional banking, why should a stablecoin serve as the
money transmitter?
XIV. Conclusions
Regulators, especially regulators in the United States, often fear accusations of stifling
innovation. As such, the cryptocurrency space has grown over the past decade with very
little regulatory oversight.
But fortunately for regulators, there is no actual innovation to stifle. Cryptocurrencies
cannot revolutionize payments or finance, as the basic nature of all cryptocurrencies render
Yale Information Society Project 30 30
them fundamentally unsuitable to revolutionize our financial system—which, by the way,
already has decades of successful experience with digital payments and electronic money.
The supposedly “decentralized” and “trustless” cryptocurrency systems, both technically
and socially, fail to provide meaningful benefits to society—and indeed, necessarily also
fail in their foundational claims of decentralization and trustlessness.
When regulating cryptocurrencies, the best starting point is history. Regulating various
tokens is best done through the existing securities law framework, an area where the US
has a near century of well-established law. It starts with regulating the issuance of new
cryptocurrency tokens and related securities. This should substantially reduce the number
of fraudulent offerings.
Similarly, active regulation of the cryptocurrency exchanges should offer substantial
benefits, including eliminating significant consumer risk, blocking key money-laundering
channels, and overall producing a far more regulated and far less manipulated market.
Finally, the stablecoins need basic regulation as money transmitters. Unless action is taken
they risk becoming substantial conduits for money laundering, but requiring them to treat
all users as customers should prevent this risk from developing further.
The Death of Cryptocurrency | Nicholas Weaver 31
XII. References
1 The cost to merchants for credit cards may be higher, but many credit cards effectively transfer 1% of the purchase to
the cardholder as miles, cash-back, or other explicit benefits. Additionally, “card-not-present” transactions often charge
an additional 1% compared with “swipe” or “dip” card-present transactions due to the greater fraud risk present in
card-not-present transactions. My own small-business checking account, should I wish to accept credit cards, charges
2.6% + $0.10 for card-present transactions and 3.5% + $0.10 for card-not-present transactions.
2 See, e.g., Chase Bank’s schedule of fees for business accounts, in Additional Banking Services and Fees for Business
Accounts: Deposit Account Agreement, CHASE BANK 11 (Oct. 16, 2022),
https://www.chase.com/content/dam/chasecom/en/checking/documents/biz-how-your-transaction-will-work.pdf.
Cash deposits over a threshold are subject to a $2.50 per $1,000 fee for counting and verification, although it does not
apply to ATM deposits.
3 FinCEN, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network of the US Treasury, provides a convenient guide for consumers.
See Notice to Customers: A CTR Reference Guide, U.S. DEP’T TREASURY FIN. CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK,
https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/CTRPamphlet.pdf.
4 The size of the key is actually measured in “Bits,” or “Binary Digits.” So instead of 0-9, it is either 0 or 1. Bitcoin uses
256 bit public keys, which when written in decimal would be roughly 76-digits long.
5 “Alice,” “Bob,” “Carol,” and “Dave” are commonly used names of the participants in cryptographic protocols, with
“Eve” acting as a passive eavesdropper and “Mallory” acting as a manipulating adversary.
6 Traditionally, the rules only ask if the check is well-formed and actually sound, with sufficient fees paid to the miner
to make it worth including, but miners can impose additional restrictions should they desire, such as only validating a
check if it comes from an OFAC sanctioned entity.
7 A good example of this is the State of Colorado’s “acceptance” of cryptocurrency for tax payments. They don’t actually
accept Bitcoin. Instead, the Bitcoin is transferred through PayPal, which converts it into dollars and charges an additional
$1 and 1.83% of the amount transferred. See Cryptocurrency, COLO. DEP’T REVENUE: TAXATION DIV. (2022),
https://tax.colorado.gov/cryptocurrency.
8 The attack attempted to steal $1 billion, but damage limitation limited the North Korean attackers to only succeeding
in transferring $100 million. Of that, $20 was subsequently recovered. See The Lazarus Heist: How North Korea Almost
Pulled Off a Billion-Dollar Hack, BBC NEWS (June 21, 2021), https://www.bbc.com/news/stories-57520169.
9 This attack was also attributed to North Korea. Aaron Schaffer, North Korean Hackers Linked to $620 Million Axie
Infinity Crypto Heist, WASH. POST (Apr. 14, 2022), https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/04/14/us-
links-axie-crypto-heist-north-korea/. A good resource tracking various thefts and scams is Web 3 Is Going Just Great,
available at https://web3isgoinggreat.com.
10 The only major exception to this was the “DAO hack,” where the original Ethereum Decentralized Autonomous
Organization suffered a massive theft. Normally the theft would be irreversible, but the programmers in charge of
Ethereum released a new version of the code that undid the theft. The reversal happened not because normal users
suffered a loss, but because a significant number of those responsible for coding and running Ethereum suffered losses.
As such, these reversals are not commonplace, and irreversibility continues to be a fundamental part of cryptocurrency
systems.
11 Anyone who doesn’t follow these rules will find their money quickly lost. One of the earliest Bitcoin exchanges,
Tradehill, went out of business when faced with chargebacks from their payment processor. Sienrak, Bankrupt Bitcoin
Exchange Tradehill Suing Red Hot Payment Startup Dwolla For $2M, VENTUREBEAT (Mar. 7, 2012),
https://venturebeat.com/security/tradehill-sues-suing-dwolla-Bitcoin/. Similarly, Steve Wozniak attempted to sell
$70,000 worth of Bitcoin to someone who paid through PayPal. The transaction turned out to be fraudulent. James
Cook, Apple Cofounder Steve Wozniak Said He Was Scammed Out Of $70,000 In Bitcoin, BUS. INSIDER (Feb. 27, 2018),
https://www.businessinsider.com/steve-wozniak-stolen-70000-Bitcoin-2018-2.
12 This is why most cryptocurrency “purchases” on cryptocurrency exchanges don’t actually involve a cryptocurrency
transaction. Instead, the exchange just updates its own internal database of “who owns what cryptocurrencies.” The
only cryptocurrency transactions actually occur when the user moves the cryptocurrency to or from their account on an
exchange.
13 The Lightning network was intended as a peer-to-peer system, but the basic nature and usage require that most
transactions pass through just one or a few highly connected central relays.
14 For a good retrospective of the Salvadorian Bitcoin environment a year after the experiment began, see Jacob Silverman
& Ben McKenzie, Nayib Bukele’s Broken Bitcoin Promise, INTERCEPT (July 22, 2022),
https://theintercept.com/2022/07/22/Bitcoin-crypto-el-salvador-nayib-bukele/.
15 David Gerard, El Salvador’s Bitcoin Law—One Year On, With The World’s Coolest Dictator, ATTACK OF THE 50 FOOT
BLOCKCHAIN (Sept. 7, 2021), https://davidgerard.co.uk/blockchain/2022/09/24/el-salvadors-Bitcoin-law-one-year-
on-with-the-worlds-coolest-dictator/.
16 Samuel Haig, El Salvador Introduces Fuel Subsidy of $0.20 Per Gallon to Locals Who Pay in BTC, COINTELEGRAPH
(Oct. 4, 2021), https://cointelegraph.com/news/el-salvador-introduces-fuel-subsidy-of-0-20-per-liter-to-locals-
who-pay-in-btc.
17 See Kyle Soska & Nicolas Christin, Measuring the Longitudinal Evolution of the Online Anonymous Marketplace
Ecosystem, USENIX (Aug. 12, 2015), https://www.usenix.org/system/files/sec15-paper-soska-updated_v2.pdf, for a
detailed analysis of these marketplaces. Since then the markets have actually shrunk, as the indictment of the
administrators of Deep Dot Web have made it significantly less convenient for new users to find these markets. See Press
Release, Administrators of DeepDotWeb Indicted for Money Laundering Conspiracy, Relating to Kickbacks for Sales of
Fentanyl, Heroin and Other Illegal Goods on the Darknet, DOJ OFF. PUB. AFF. (May 8, 2019),
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/administrators-deepdotweb-indicted-money-laundering-conspiracy-relating-
kickbacks-sales.
18 It is unfortunately very hard to estimate total damage, but the scale of payments is in the billions: FinCEN reports
seeing $1.2 billion in ransomware payments in 2021. See FinCEN Analysis Reveals Ransomware Reporting in BSA Filing
Increased Significantly During the Second Half of 2021, FIN. CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK (Nov. 1, 2022),
https://www.fincen.gov/news/news-releases/fincen-analysis-reveals-ransomware-reporting-bsa-filings-increased-
significantly.
19 See Nicholas Weaver, The Ransomware Problem Is a Bitcoin Problem, LAWFARE (May 27, 2021),
https://www.lawfareblog.com/ransomware-problem-Bitcoin-problem.
20 An example of the claimed benefits are those stated by Amazon in a blog entry promoting their AWS blockchain
product. See, e.g., What is Decentralization in Blockchain?, AMAZON WEB SERVS.,
https://aws.amazon.com/blockchain/decentralization-in-blockchain/.
21 For example, the ACH system in the US has processed 185 million same-day transactions, moving some $486 billion
per quarter through this distributed system. Same Day ACH Growth Leads ACH Network to Second Quarter Gains,
NACHA NEWS (Aug. 2, 2022), https://www.nacha.org/news/same-day-ach-growth-leads-ach-network-second-
quarter-gains.
22 Hashrate Distribution, BLOCKCHAIN.COM, https://www.blockchain.com/explorer/charts/pools (estimating the
hashrate distribution amongst the largest mining pools).
23 Coinbase and Lido Dominate Ethereum Staking, TRUSTNODES (Sept. 15, 2022),
https://www.trustnodes.com/2022/09/15/coinbase-and-lido-dominate-ethereum-staking.
24 One recent such event lost $160 million when a wallet was generated using a tool that lacked sufficient entropy when
generating private keys. See Vishal Chawla, Experts Blame a “Vanity Address” Bug for Wintermute’s $160 Million Hack,
BLOCK (Sept. 20, 2022), https://www.theblock.co/post/171192/experts-blame-a-vanity-address-bug-for-
wintermutes-160-million-hack.
25 A classic example of this is the original major Bitcoin exchange Mt. Gox, which had an exchange-controlled program
(the “Willy Bot”) that manipulated prices, before the exchange failed leaving the users without their cryptocurrencies.
For the original reporting of the bot, see Willyreport, The Willy Report: Proof of Massive Fraudulent Trading Activity
at Mt. Gox, and How it Has Affected the Price of Bitcoin, WILLY REPORT (May 25, 2014),
https://willyreport.wordpress.com/2014/05/25/the-willy-report-proof-of-massive-fraudulent-trading-activity-at-
mt-gox-and-how-it-has-affected-the-price-of-Bitcoin/. Later the operator of Mt. Gox, Marc Karpeles, admitted
to running this bot in court. William Suberg, Mt. Gox Trial Update: Karpeles Admits ‘Willy Bot’ Existence,
COINTELEGRAPH (July 11, 2017), https://cointelegraph.com/news/mt-gox-trial-update-karpeles-admits-willy-bot-
existence.
26 This is a process the Ethereum community calls “Miner Extractable Value” or MEV. In reality, most MEV is the miners
explicitly front running trades on decentralized exchanges. For a detailed analysis of the profit involved, see Julian Piet,
Jaiden Fairoze & Nicholas Weaver, Extracting Godl [sic] from the Salt Mines: Ethereum Miners Extracting Value,
ARXIV:2203.15930 (Mar. 29, 2022), https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15930.
27 In the early days of Ethereum, 10% of all ETH was “invested” in a system called “The DAO,” the first major
Decentralized Autonomous Organization (at the time, around $150 million worth of ETH was invested, Klint Finley, A
$50 Million Hack Just Showed That the DAO Was All Too Human, WIRED (June 18, 2016),
https://www.wired.com/2016/06/50-million-hack-just-showed-dao-human/, while Ethereum’s total market
capitalization at the time was ~$1 billion, Market Capitalization of Ethereum (ETH) from August 2013 to November
9, 2022, STATISTA, https://www.statista.com/statistics/807195/ethereum-market-capitalization-quarterly/). Someone
discovered an oversight in the DAO’s underlying code and used it to extract a substantial amount of the ETH. As many
Ethereum developers’ assets were amongst the amount stolen, the developers changed the code running Ethereum (a
“hard fork”) to undo the theft. Of course, by the “code is law” and “smart contract” logic behind Ethereum, the thief
had a legitimate right to the ETH (the thief followed the code to the letter), which means that the developers, by doing
a post hoc changing of the Ethereum code, were by Ethereum’s logic stealing from the honest theft to benefit the
developers.
28 Earlier this year, the London Metal Exchange reversed and canceled a large number of transactions during
unprecedented market conditions, demonstrating that the principle of reversibility is fundamental to how these markets
work. Reuters, LME Had Regulatory Obligation to Be Able to Cancel Nickel Trades in March, Filings Say, CNBC (Nov.
29, 2022), https://www.cnbc.com/2022/11/29/lme-had-regulatory-obligation-to-be-able-to-cancel-nickel-
trades-in-march-filings-say.html.
29 A good reference is the site Web 3 Is Going Just Great, available at https://web3isgoinggreat.com/. At the time of
writing, the first article was on a $20 million theft from the “Transit Swap” due to a vulnerability in the smart contract.
30 See Elizabeth Lopatto, How the Anchor Protocol Helped Sink Terra, VERGE (May 20, 2022),
https://www.theverge.com/2022/5/20/23131647/terra-luna-do-kwon-stablecoin-anchor.
31 Dentacoin, released in 2017, promised to be the blockchain solution for the global dental industry. The notional value
of all dentacoin peaked at $1.9 billion before quickly crashing. Currently the value of all dentacoin is just over one
million dollars, representing a fall of 99.95%. Dentacoin to USD Chart, COINMARKETCAP,
https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/dentacoin/.
32 For more information on the 2017 boom, see generally John Griffin & Amin Shams, Is Bitcoin Really Untethered?, 75
J. FIN. 1913 (2020), https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jofi.12903.The 2021 boom was accompanied by
an even larger issuance of new tether, both in absolute terms and relative to the increase in market capitalization.
33 The Terra/Luna system is still crumbling. First, Three Arrows Capital (3AC), a crypto hedge fund which was invested
very heavily into this scheme, collapsed in July of this year. This was quickly followed by the crypto lenders Celsius,
Voyager, and Blockfi, all three of which lent customer funds to 3AC, which 3AC invested in the Terra/Luna anchor
protocol. Lachlan Keller, Three Arrows, Voyager Failures Raise Questions of Who Is Next in Crypto Fall From Grace,
FORKAST (July 6, 2022), https://forkast.news/three-arrows-voyager-failure-crypto-fall-from-grace/.
34 328 U.S. 293 (1946).
35 Id. at 298-99.
36 Id. at 301.
37 For further information on this event, see Press Release, Telegram to Return $1.2 Billion to Investors and Pay $18.5
Million Penalty to Settle SEC Charges, SEC (June 26, 2020), https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2020-146.
38 Report of Investigation Pursuant to Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: The DAO, SEC (July 25,
2017), https://www.sec.gov/litigation/investreport/34-81207.pdf.
39 The CFTC just sued one such DAO, the “Ooki DAO,” specifically under the theory that the DAO, by not formally
incorporating, leaves all the individual participants liable for the actions of the DAO. A copy of the docket is available
at https://www.courtlistener.com/docket/65369411/commodity-futures-trading-commission-v-ooki-dao/.
40 See Complaint, SEC v. Wahi, 2:22-CV-01009 (W.D. Wash. July 21, 2022),
https://www.sec.gov/litigation/complaints/2022/comp-pr2022-127.pdf.
41 Form 10-Q, COINBASE at 83 (May 10, 2022), https://d18rn0p25nwr6d.cloudfront.net/CIK-0001679788/89c60d81-
41a2-4a3c-86fb-b4067ab1016c.pdf.
42 Subsequent to the writing of this report, the FTX enterprise collapsed, with the offshore exchange’s collapse also
drawing in FTX US. Now all FTX US customers are unsecured creditors in a corporate bankruptcy where the new
restructuring CEO, John Ray III, described the situation as worse than Enron.
43 See Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible Virtual Currencies,
FINCEN (May 9, 2019),
https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/201905/FinCEN%20Guidance%20CVC%20FINAL%20508.pdf.
44 There are arguments made for “Central Bank Digital Currencies” (CBDCs), stablecoins issued directly by the central
bank. Such CBDCs really can take three separate forms. The first is an improvement of the central bank’s operating
infrastructure. This represents a case where “blockchain” or “CBDC” is simply a distraction, designed to enable the
central bank to pay to improve its internal infrastructure. The second form has the CBDC available only to participants
who pass KYC/AML checks. In that case the CBDC is really the central bank acting as a retail bank, no different than
some countries use their post offices to perform. The final form, a bearer asset without KYC/AML controls, would have
the same money-laundering concerns as the backed stablecoins. It is doubtful a major central bank would wish to create
such a criminal-friendly structure.
45 See Tether, COINBASE, https://www.coinbase.com/price/tether; Tether, KRAKEN
https://www.kraken.com/prices/tether.
46 The founder of Liberty Reserve pled guilty and received a 20 year prison sentence. See Press Release, Liberty Reserve
Founder Sentenced to 20 Years for Laundering Hundreds of Millions of Dollars, DOJ OFF. PUB. AFF’S (May 6, 2016),
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/liberty-reserve-founder-sentenced-20-years-laundering-hundreds-millions-
dollars.
47 This is equivalent to a system where everyone has an arbitrary number of Swiss-style numbered accounts, where
transactions between accounts are publicly viewable but there is no notion tying accounts to individuals.
Published by the Information Society Project at Yale Law School, Baker Hall, 100
Tower Parkway Room 412, New Haven, CT 06520 United States of America.
© Information Society Project at Yale Law School 2022
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution ShareAlike 3.0
IGO (CC-BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO) license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/).
The Digital Future Whitepaper Series is made possible thanks to the support of
Immuta.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this whitepaper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views
of Yale Law School or any other organizations including sponsors.
XI. About the Author Digital Future Whitepaper Series
The Digital Future Whitepaper Series, launched in 2020, is
a venue for leading global thinkers to question the impact
of digital technologies on law and society. The series aims
to provide academics, researchers, and practitioners a
forum to describe new challenges of data and regulation,
to confront core assumptions about law and technology,
and to propose new ways to align legal and ethical
frameworks to the problems of the digital world.
t
The Digital Future Whitepaper Series is led by ISP visiting
Nicholas Weaver received his
fellow Andrew Burt and co-edited by ISP Wikimedia
Ph.D. in computer science in
fellow Artur Pericles Lima Monteiro and ISP affiliate
2003 and since then has worked
fellow Nikolas Guggenberger. Sachin Holdheim (Yale
at the International Computer
Law School ’24) served as the research assistant for this
Science Institute with a focus on
whitepaper.
security, including criminal
activity. He has followed the
cryptocurrency space
professionally for a decade. He
Information Society Project
holds no cryptocurrencies, and
the only Bitcoin he ever
possessed he gave away in The Information Society Project (ISP) is an intellectual
2015. center at Yale Law School, founded in 1997 by Professor
Jack Balkin. Over the past twenty years, the ISP has
grown from a handful of people gathering to discuss
internet governance into an international community
working to illuminate the complex relationships between
law, technology, and society.
127 Wall Street 203.432.4992
New Haven, CT 06511 www.law.yale.edu/isp
127 Wall Street 203.432.4992
New Haven, CT www.law.yale.edu/is
06511 p

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/TBACCharge2Q42024.pdf
Digital Assets and the Treasury Market
TBAC presentation
October 2024
Charge:
A. Please comment on the effects of the growth in digital assets on the Treasury market
B. Please summarize existing efforts at using blockchain technology or tokenization for Treasury
market related applications
C. How might blockchain technology be used to innovate or improve on Treasury market
operations?
D. What are the potential benefits and costs of tokenization of Treasuries?
E. What effects might these trends have on recommended Treasury issuance or the health of the
Treasury secondary market?
Trends in digit asset growth and usage – rapid growth from
very low levels
Total Cryptocurrency Market Cap ($bn)
▪ Digital assets have witnessed rapid growth albeit
3,000
from a small base. Growth has come both from
native crypto coins like Bitcoin and Ethereum, as 2,500
well as stablecoins
2,000
▪ To date, household and industry adoption of 1,500
cryptocurrency has been limited to holding digital
1,000
assets for investment purposes**
500
▪ Digital asset market cap remains low relative to
other financial and real assets, and growth thus far 0
15' 16' 17' 18' 19' 20' 21' 22' 23' 24'
does not seem to have cannibalized demand for
Bitcoin Other, including Stablecoins
Treasuries
Size of Digital Assets in Relation to Other Asset Classes*
▪ The use case of digital assets continues to evolve,
$bn 2015 2019 2024
but interest has proceeded along two main tracks
Total Crypto Market Cap $7.0 $197 $2,385
▪ Primary use case for Bitcoin seems to be a store of
Bitcoin Market Cap $6.4 $134 $1,364
value aka “digital gold” in a decentralized finance
Other Coin Market Cap $0.6 $57 $855
(DeFi) world; speculative interest seems to have
played a prominent role in the growth of digital Stablecoins Market Cap $0.0 $5 $166
tokens thus far Total U.S. Equity Market Cap $23,364 $33,935 $59,787
Total Marketable Tsy Debt $13,207 $16,682 $27,728
▪ Efforts to leverage blockchain and distributed
Treasury Bills $1,514 $2,417 $6,005
ledger technology (DLT) to develop new
applications and improve the legacy financial Total Real Estate Market Cap $25,990 $33,479 $52,319
market clearing and settlement infrastructure
Money Market Funds AUM $2,759 $3,604 $6,468
Commercial Bank Deposits $10,991 $13,291 $17,732
Currency in Circulation $1,426 $1,802 $2,359
Sources (all charts and tables): Coinmarketcap; BBG; FRB; ICI
* Year-end values for 2015/2019, latest available for 2024; 1
** FRB, “Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2023”, May 2023
What are stablecoins and why are they growing?
▪ Stablecoins are a type of cryptocurrency that are designed to Total Stablecoin Market Cap ($bn)
maintain a stable value, typically by linking the value of the
200
currency to an underlying pool of collateral1
180
▪ Use has grown rapidly in recent years as the digital asset 160
market matures, including increased demand for crypto assets
140
with stable cash-like characteristics
120
▪ Stablecoins have also gained popularity as they have been 100
attractive collateral to lend on DeFi networks 80
60
▪ While there are different types of stablecoins, fiat-backed ones
have shown the most significant growth 40
20
▪ Stablecoins play an integral role intermediating transactions in
0
digital asset markets - over 80% of all crypto transactions
15' 16' 17' 18' 19' 20' 21' 22' 23' 24'
now use a stablecoin as one leg of the transaction2
Fiat-Backed All Other
Main Uses of Stablecoins in the Digital Asset Ecosphere
C
B B A. An investor holds their stablecoins at a Crypto
n io
c
e
lb
a t
Sr e
w
o
r r
o B
ExC cr hy ap nto
g e
niahckcol nioctiB
B.
e
s
(
S
sut
ex
ia
nn
rc
b
vcrh
el
e
ea
e
g
n
c
asuog
t
sali
e
an
ab.
t
leh
e
vM
do
c
io
t
ol
aads
i
lnt
ni n
sd
se
g
o
x
aus
uc
,
rn
rh
e
ciea
n
ef
in
s
sf oe
sug
c
fure
t
e
e
ls
i idv
d
q
n
e
)
uo
o
l idy
dnw
e
i
m
t
mpp
yoa
a
u
fsky
oli
ti tn
rii
s
p
n
g
t3
lt
he
e
t
e
hr
c
e
e
h
es
m
xat
ci
no hsn
a,
n
t
t
gh
h
ee
e
i yr
to
BE facilitate transactions between and within different
A
niahckcol muereht c
c
trh
r
aoa nsin
ss
a-s c,
c
h
ta
ia
oll
i
no
n
sw
s
ii
e
nn
r
vg
v
o
if
c
lo ver
es
m
.
S
O
to avr be
e
l
r
ee
8
cff o0ic
i%
nie
s
n 1ot
f
a an lld
c
ru ys pe tr o- friendly
C. In addition, many exchanges and defi platforms provide
E.g. Coinbase,
nr Kraken, etc B some sort of margin trading or direct lending services,
io
c e
lb
a
t
So
t is
o
p
e
D
niahckcol
norT
o fuf nw
d
=h
s
ic Soh
r
t
acs bota
lll
eb
a
cl te
e
oc
r
io
a
ni
l
n is
n
a tr he
e
u dse iad
g
a rs
a
mth e
a
m boa vjo er source of
Sources (top-right): coinmarketcap.com
1 A very small subset of Stablecoins do not link to a pool of collateral, but algorithmically create/destroy tokens to maintain their peg
2 FRB, “The Stable in Stablecoins”, December 2022; See also data on theblock.co 2
3 This is somewhat of a simplification to make the point that exchanges are playing the economic function of banks in the digital asset ecosphere
Growth in stablecoins has resulted in a modest increase in
demand for short-dated Treasuries
▪ The most prevalent stablecoins in the market today are fiat- U.S. Treasury Bills Held by Tether ($bn)
backed stablecoins
90
▪ A very significant portion of that collateral is taking the form of 80
1
T-bills and Treasury-backed repo transactions 70 8
4
7
− We estimate that $120bn in total stablecoin collateral is directly 60
3
invested in Treasuries 50 6 7 6
3 5 5
5
40
▪ Over the near term, we expect continued growth in stablecoin
9 0 9
markets along with the overall size of the digital asset market 30 5 3 4 3
3
9
20 2
▪ Medium-term regulatory and policy choices will determine the 9
10 5 1
fate of this “private currency” 1
0
▪ History shows that “private currency” that does not meet NQA
requirements leads to financial instability and as such is highly
undesirable* Example of Tether’s 24Q2 Collateral Backing
Top Stablecoins by Market Cap ($bn) Asset $bn % of Total
Cash & Cash Equivalents $99.8bn 84.2%
3 1
U.S. Treasury Bills $80.9bn 68.3%
9
5 Repo $12.3bn 10.3%
Tether
Money Market Funds $6.4bn 5.4%
USDC
Cash & Deposits $0.1bn 0.1%
35
Dai
Non-U.S. Bills $0.1bn 0.1%
FDUSD Corporate Bonds $0.0bn 0.0%
120
USDD Precious Metals $3.8bn 3.2%
Bitcoin $4.7bn 4.0%
Other Investments/Loans $10.1bn 8.5%
Total $118.4bn 100.0%
Sources (top-right to bottom-right): Tether disclosures; coinmarketcap.com; Tether disclosures
* NQA = No Questions Asked, see Gorton, Gary B., and Jeffery Zhang. “Taming Wildcat Stablecoins.” The University of Chicago Law Review, 2021. 3
Rapid growth and massive volatility might lead to future
hedging needs and flight-to-quality demand for Treasuries
▪ Native crypto assets like Bitcoin have seen significant
Bitcoin Price
price increases in recent years, but volatility remains
$80,000
very high
‘21 Crash: ’21-’22 Crash:
− Bitcoin has experienced four large price corrections $70,000 -53% decline -76% decline
since 2017
$60,000
▪ To date, digital asset markets have limited access to
$50,000
traditional safe-haven or risk hedging instruments like
Treasuries $40,000
▪ In recent years, institutional sponsorship of Bitcoin $30,000
‘17-’18 Crash:
(BlackRock ETF, MicroStrategy) has been growing and
-84% decline ’19-’20 Crash:
$20,000
crypto assets have behaved like “high beta” assets -60% decline
▪ Structural demand for Treasuries may increase as the $10,000
digital asset market cap grows, both as a hedge
$0
against downside price volatility and as an “on-chain” 01/16 01/17 01/18 01/19 01/20 01/21 01/22 01/23 01/24
safe-haven asset
Bitcoin vs. Alternatives: 3M Annualized Bitcoin 90-day Correlation vs. Nasdaq and
Realized Volatility Treasuries
140 0.8
120
0.6
100
0.4
80
0.2
60
40 0.0
20 -0.2
0
-0.4
01/17 01/18 01/19 01/20 01/21 01/22 01/23 01/24
01/17 01/18 01/19 01/20 01/21 01/22 01/23 01/24
Bitcoin Gold S&P 500 vs. Nasdaq vs. Treasuries
Sources (all charts): Bloomberg
4
Parallels between the digital asset ecosphere and existing
financial markets
Legacy “off-chain” Markets “on-chain” Digital Assets Market
Similar to…
Currency in Circulation Central Bank Digital
s M
t e and Reserves Currencies o
s n
s e
A Similar to… y
e Money Market Funds Stablecoins
-
l
i
k k
i e
l
-
y A
e Similar to… s
n Bank Deposits Deposit Coins s
o e
M st
Treasuries Tokenized Treasuries
Tokenization
s
t T
e o
s Bonds Tokenized Bonds k
s e
A n
e zi
l b Equities Tokenized Equities de
a
z A
i n s
e
k
o
Housing/CRE
HoT uok sie nn gi /ze Cd
R E
stes
T
Art/other assets NFTs
Native crypto assets
e.g. Bitcoin
Somewhat Ongoing Primarily pilot Expected in
developed markets development projects Future
Sources: PNC
5
What is tokenization? A broad overview
▪ Tokenization is the process of representing claims
digitally in the form of tokens on a programmable Anatomy of a Token: Core and Services Layer
platform like a distributed ledger/blockchain1
Services Layer
− Tokens can be issued in “native form” on the DLT Services Layer
platform, or they can be digital representations of
existing assets Information
0 on:
Information on: Core Layer
▪ Tokenization has the potential to unlock the Owner
Custody methods
benefits of programmable, interoperable ledgers Settlement Custodian
Unique asset id
to a wider array of legacy financial assets methods
System of
Escrow methods
origin
▪ Key characteristics and benefits of tokenization2: Regulatory
Issuance value
methods
− Core and Service Layers: Tokenized assets integrate both
e.g. For a U.S. Treasury, the “core layer” would have information on
a “core layer” containing information about the asset and
the specific CUSIP, the owner, where it is held in custody, etc, and the
ownership with a “service layer” governing rules on
“service layer” would contain specific instructions settlement, where
transfer and settlement the coupon payments are to be sent, etc
− Smart Contracts: Tokenization enables automation
through smart contracts, which execute transactions Example of Tokenization
automatically when predefined conditions are met,
allowing for contingent transfers of assets and claims
Tokenization Transformation
− Atomic Settlement: Settlement can be streamlined by
ensuring all parts of a transaction occur simultaneously Native Issuance
across all parties involved, reducing the risk of settlement
failure and improving the reliability
− Composability: Different tokenized assets can be bundled
together to create more complex and new financial
products, allowing for highly customizable solutions for
asset management and transfer
− Fractional Ownership: Tokenized assets can be divided Off Chain System Blockchain
into smaller, more accessible portions
1 BIS, “Blueprint for the future monetary system: improving the old, enabling the new”, 2023
2 For more discussion see FRB, “Tokenization: Overview and Financial Stability Implications”, 2023, and Hilary J. Allen, “Hearing on Next Generation Infrastructure: How Tokenization of Real-World Assets will Facility 6
Efficient Markets”, 2024
Promise of a tokenized financial market infrastructure
▪ The benefits of tokenization extend far beyond and are independent of native crypto assets like Bitcoin
as well as the public, permissionless blockchain technology those assets have popularized
− Tokenization of a variety of financial and real-word assets across interoperable ledger systems promises to unleash
new economic arrangements and enhance efficiencies
▪ Some markets – like international payments or repo – stand to gain immediate and large potential
benefits from tokenization, while the gains for other markets will be more incremental
− The Treasury market is already highly efficient, so gains from tokenization are likely to be incremental
− Still, even small incremental improvements in a very large market like the Treasuries market can be impactful at
scale
▪ To fulfill this potential though, there is a need for a unified ledger, or at least a highly interoperable set
of integrated ledgers that work together seamlessly1
− Legacy systems are built from individually maintained ledgers that are often “siloed”, with a need for complex
messaging protocols between the institutions maintaining these ledgers
− This creates significant inefficiencies and settlement fail risk for a variety of transactions which tokenization on a
unified ledger could help streamline
▪ These ledgers will also need to be developed under the auspices of Central Banks and the foundation of
trust they provide
− The full potential of tokenization requires some monetary unit of account that denominates transactions,
accompanies the means of payment, and is accepted without question by market participants
− In a similar manner to how privately-issued “wildcat” currencies were replaced by government-backed central
currencies in the late-1800s, Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC) will likely need to replace stablecoins as the
primary form of digital currency underpinning tokenized transactions2
1 BIS, “Blueprint for the future monetary system: improving the old, enabling the new”, 2023
2 Gordon et al, “Taming Wildcat Stablecoins”, 2021 7
Key ongoing projects in tokenizing U.S. Treasuries
▪ The tokenization of U.S. Treasuries is a relatively new trend, and most projects have yet to
scale; some of the notable public and private initiatives underway are as follows:
▪ Tokenized Treasury Funds: Provides investors access to “tokenized” forms of Treasuries on
blockchains that behave in many ways like Treasury ETFs or government MMFs
− The largest of these funds are BlackRock's BUIDL Fund and Franklin Templeton’s OnChain U.S.
Government Money Fund
− Other notable funds or projects include Ondo Financial, Hashnote, and CoinShares
− The total tokenized Treasury fund market is estimated to have a market cap of ~$2bn1
▪ Tokenized Treasury Repo Projects: Tokenized Treasuries allow for instantaneous, 24/7 settlement
and trading, potentially paving the way for timelier intraday repo transactions
− JPM’s Onyx platform uses tokenized Treasuries to provide intraday, Treasury-backed repo solutions
− Smart Contracts can be programmed directly into the tokenized Treasury that simplify and automate the
transfer of Treasuries as collateral over several different transactions
▪ Ongoing pilot projects from DTCC and others: Several private and public market participants are
running pilots using tokenization to streamline payment and securities settlement
− DTCC/Digital Asset Treasury Tokenization Pilot2: Collaboration with many different financial market agents,
including banks and custody agents, to use tokenized Treasuries in different applications ranging from
posting/return collateral for a margin trade and hypothecating a tokenized Treasury in case of a default
− There are also many pilot projects underway from SIFMA, the BIS, and numerous central banks around
using tokenized assets to improve payments and settlement processes
1 RWA.xyz
2 DTCC, “Digital Dollar Project and DTCC: Security Settlement Pilot”, 2022 8
Projects leveraging blockchain and tokenization
Public/
Project Description
Private
Pilot uses shared ledger technology to explore how blockchain can streamline
SIFMA Multi-Asset Ledger
Private and enhance post-trade processes across various asset classes using a shared
Settlement Pilot (2024)
immutable ledger
Collaboration between several private-market agents to simulate four key
DTCC/Digital Asset Treasury
Private transactions using tokenized Treasuries, including posting/returning tokenized
Tokenization Project (2024)
Treasuries as collateral and seizing collateral during defaults
Project Ion is a blockchain-based platform launched by DTCC designed to
DTCC Project Ion (2022-) Private modernize and accelerate securities settlement, offering near real-time
capabilities using blockchain technology.
Provides real-time, intraday repo solutions using tokenized Treasuries as
JPM Onyx Platform (2020-) Private
collateral
Several funds now provide “on-chain” access to tokenized Treasuries with
Numerous Tokenization
Private over $2bn in total market cap outstanding, including BlackRock’s BUIDL and
Projects
Franklin Templeton’s FOBXX fund. Other platforms include RSN/RSL
Consortium of 40 private sector financial firms, the BIS, and a group of
Project Agorá (2024) Public/Private central banks aiming to explore how tokenization can enhance wholesale
cross-border transactions
Collaboration between the NYFRB and the Monetary Authority of Singapore to
Project Cedar (2024) Public examine the use of DLT to facility cross-border payments for trade,
commerce, and finance
The EIB issued £50bn in digital bonds directly onto a private blockchain in
European Investment Bank
Public 2023, the first major government entity to issue bonds directly onto a
(2023)
blockchain to date
A 2021 BIS survey of central banks found that 86% were actively researching
Numerous CBDC Pilot
Public the potential for CBDCs, 60% were experimenting with the technology, and
Projects
14% were deploying pilot projects
9
Key potential benefits of tokenizing U.S. Treasuries
▪ Improvements in clearing and settlement
− Tokenized Treasuries allow for more streamlined, “atomic settlement”, where all parts of a transaction
involving Treasuries settle simultaneously across all parties, reducing the risk of settlement failure
▪ Improved collateral management
− Smart contracts programmed directly into the tokenized Treasury allow for more efficient collateral
management, including pre-programmed collateral transfers once pre-set conditions are met
▪ Improved transparency and accountability
− Immutable ledgers could allow for greater transparency in Treasury market operations, reducing opacity, and
providing regulators, issuers, and investors with more real-time insight into trading activities
▪ Composability and innovation
− The ability to bundle different tokenized assets could lead to the creation of new and highly customizable
financial products and services based on U.S. Treasury securities, such as derivatives and structured
products
▪ Increased inclusion and demand?
− Tokenization can make Treasuries more accessible to a wider range of investors, including smaller retail
investors through fractionalization and those in emerging markets
▪ Increased liquidity?
− Tokenization could potentially create new investment and trading strategies through seamless integrations
and programmable logic; tokenized Treasuries may trade 24/7 on blockchain networks, though the impact of
this could work in two ways
Tokenization of the Treasury market holds promise but needs further study; caution is warranted
as the Treasury market is already highly liquid and efficient
10
Potential risks and challenges in tokenizing U.S. Treasuries
Although the tokenization of U.S. Treasuries has potential benefits, design choices can present
certain risks and challenges that need to be carefully considered
▪ Technological Risks:
− Tokenized infrastructure will be difficult to develop in parallel in a cost-effective manner and is unlikely to be as
efficient as the legacy market until it achieves sufficient scale (“incumbent advantage”)
− It is unclear if DLT platforms offer a compelling technological advantage versus legacy systems and transition costs
are also likely to be high given a large and growing installed base of Treasuries
− Cybersecurity Threats: Certain types of DLT solutions (public, permissionless blockchains) are vulnerable to hacking
and other cybersecurity attacks, which could pose risks to the security of tokenized Treasuries
▪ Operational Risks:
− Counterparty Risk: Investors may be exposed to counterparty risk, which is the risk that the issuer or custodian of
the tokenized securities may default on their obligations
− Custody Risks: Ensuring the safekeeping of tokenized Treasuries requires robust custody solutions, and there may be
challenges associated with the custody of digital assets
− Privacy Issues: Some participants will view the increased transparency of public blockchains as a downside
▪ Regulatory and Legal Uncertainty:
− Evolving Regulations: Legal requirements/compliance obligations regarding tokenized assets remain unclear
− Jurisdictional Challenges: Varying regulatory frameworks across jurisdictions can complicate cross-border transactions
and create legal complexities
▪ Financial Stability and Market Risks if the tokenized markets grows significantly:
− Contagion Risk
− Complexity and Interconnectedness
− Banking/Payment Disintermediation
− “Basis Risks”
− 24/7 Trading: Could make it more vulnerable to market manipulation and higher volatility
11
Financial stability risks in a future state when the tokenized
market is significantly bigger
▪ Contagion and Interconnectedness Risk:
− Tokenization provides a bridge by which “on-chain” asset volatility could spill over into the broader financial markets
as the size of tokenized assets become more significant
− In times of stress, seamless ledgers can become a negative as deleveraging and fire sales can rapidly spread across
assets
▪ Liquidity and Maturity Mismatch Risk:
− Potential to have liquidity and maturity mismatches between non-native tokens and the underlying assets, with these
mismatches setting-up potential deleveraging driven price volatility; similar to issues witnessed in ETFs, MMFs, and
Treasury futures
− Can lead to liquidity pressures from smart contracts driven automated margin liquidation and, also a need to meet fast
settlement goals
▪ Increased Leverage:
− Tokenization can directly increase financial system leverage. For example, the underlying asset to a token could be
rehypothecated, or the token itself can be structured to be a derivative
− Potential to create marketable securities out of illiquid or physical assets which might potentially be used as collateral
▪ Increased Complexity and Opacity:
− Tokenization leads to more composability, which could significantly add complexity and opacity to the financial system
from new and non-traditional assets being added to the digital financial ecosystem
− Improperly coded smart contracts can rapidly trigger unwanted financial transactions with unintended consequences
▪ Banking Disintermediation:
− Tokenized short-dated Treasuries could prove to be an attractive alternative to bank deposits and potentially disrupt
the banking system which could negatively impact core banking activities of deposit gathering and lending
▪ Stablecoin Run Risk:
− Even with better collateral backing, unlikely stablecoins will satisfy NQA principle needed to underpin tokenization
− Runs on stablecoins have been a common occurrence in recent years, and a collapse of a major stablecoin like Tether
could lead to a fire sale of short-dated Treasuries
FRB, “Tokenization: Overview and Financial Stability Implications”, 2024
NYFRB, “Runs on Stablecoins”, 2023 12
“The Financial Stability Implication of Tokenisation.” Financial Stability Board, October 2024
Designing DLT/blockchain for tokenized Treasuries:
framework elements
▪ Establishing a framework that encourages trust and industry-wide buy-in will be necessary for digital assets and
distributed ledger technology to scale
▪ Fraud, scams, and theft have grown proportionately with the digital asset market, eroding trust in the
underlying technology
DTCC Principles to Building a Secure Digital Asset Settlement Ecosystem1
Legal Certainty
Ensure operations comply with existing laws and regulations to maintain market integrity and investor
confidence
Regulatory Compliance
Encourage alignment with regulatory frameworks to build a foundation of trust and safety in digital asset
markets
Resiliency and Security
Develop repost infrastructure capable of resisting disruptions, while protecting sensitive data and ensuring the
continuous operation of digital asset services
Safeguarding Customer Assets
Implement governance over smart contracts to manage and protect assets within the digital asset ecosystem
securely
Connectivity and Interoperability
Facilitating transactions and flexible settlements across diverse networks to enable seamless transfer and
settlement
Operational Scalability
Gaining efficiency and cost-effectiveness through standardized roles and smart contract functions to
accommodate market growth.
1DTCC, “Building the Digital Asset Securities Ecosystem Whitepaper”, 2024
13
Designing a DLT platform for tokenized Treasuries:
architecture elements
▪ Most of the major crypto projects to date have been
Public vs. Private Blockchain: A public
developed on public and permissionless blockchains,
blockchain is an open network where
which has been heralded as one of its major appeals
anyone can participate without
▪ We argue that this architecture will not be suitable for permission, while a private blockchain is
a restricted network where only
more widespread adoption of tokenized Treasuries1:
authorized participants can validate
− Technology choices: Public, permissionless blockchains use transactions and access the ledger
complex consensus mechanisms (e.g., proof-of-work, proof-of-
stake), making it difficult for them to process large transaction Permissioned vs. Permissionless
volumes efficiently Blockchain: A permissioned blockchain
restricts who can participate in the
− Operational Fragility: These blockchains rely on decentralized
network and validate transactions, while a
nodes with no centralized authority, which leads to
permissionless blockchain allows anyone
vulnerabilities
to join and participate in consensus
− Governance Gaps: Public blockchains lack clear governance without needing prior approval
structures, which increases the risks of system failures or bad
actors taking advantage
− Security Risks: The decentralized nature and lack of vetting in Optimal Blockchain Design
public blockchains increase the risk of bugs, exploits, and
attacks, as seen in historical cases of vulnerabilities being Permissionless Permissioned
exploited in Bitcoin and Ethereum
− Money Laundering and Compliance Issues: Public,
c  
permissionless blockchains allow for anonymity, which can i l
b
facilitate illegal activities such as money laundering and u
P
sanctions evasion E.g. Bitcoin, Ethereum
▪ Tokenization in the Treasury market will likely require the
development of a privately controlled and permissioned
e
blockchain managed by one or more trusted private or t a  ✓
v
public authorities i
r
P Ideally managed by
trusted govt. authority
1 For more discussion see Hilary J. Allen, “Hearing on Next Generation Infrastructure: How Tokenization of Real-World Assets will Facility Efficient Markets”, 2024
14
Designing a DLT platform for tokenized Treasuries: regulatory
elements
▪ Efforts to regulate digital assets and cryptocurrencies have intensified globally in recent
years, but remain highly fragmented and porous
▪ United States: Regulation in the U.S. remains fragmented, with oversight split between
multiple agencies like the SEC, CFTC, and FinCEN
− Ensuring Responsible Development of Digital Assets (2022): executive order signed in 2022
outlining a government-wide strategy to address the opportunities and risks of digital assets. The
order called for the development of a regulatory framework for digital assets
− Financial Innovation and Technology for the 21st Century Act (FIT21) passed the house in 2024,
and would be the most significant and comprehensive effort to regulate digital assets,
stablecoins, and cryptocurrencies
▪ European Union: Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCA) went into effect in 2024
− MiCA is the EU’s first comprehensive regulatory framework to cryptocurrencies and digital assets
− It establishes rules for issuing crypto assets, stablecoins, and utility tokens, and regulates
service providers like exchanges and custodians
− Focuses on consumer projection, stablecoin oversight, AML measures, and environmental impact
transparency
− Licensed entities under MiCA can operate across the EU with a “passport” model, allowing them
to serve all member states under a unified framework
15
What effects might these trends have on recommended Treasury
issuance or the health of the Treasury secondary market?
▪ Continued growth in stablecoins, assuming the current trend in stablecoin collateral choices continues
(or is forced by a regulator), will create structural demand for short-dated U.S. Treasuries
− Recommended issuance should on the margin lean to a higher proportion of T-bills
▪ While stablecoins currently represent a marginal segment of the T-bills market, growth over time may
expose the T-bills market to increased risk of fire sales due to runs in the stablecoin market
▪ Different redemption and settlement characteristics can lead to liquidity and maturity mismatches
between tokens and the underlying assets which in turn can create potential for heightened financial
instability in the Treasury market
▪ Tokenized “derivative” Treasury products could create a basis market between digital and native
markets (like futures or total return swaps) – this can both create additional demand and lead to
heightened volatility during deleveraging episodes
▪ Growth in, and institutionalization of, crypto markets (Bitcoin) could create additional hedging and
flight-to-quality demand for tokenized Treasuries in periods of heightened downside volatility
− Flight-to-quality demand can be hard to predict. Hedging demand could be structural, but depends on how well
Treasuries continue to hedge downside crypto-volatility
▪ Tokenization might create additional access to Treasuries from both domestic and global pools of
savings, particularly from households and smaller financial institutions, which can lead to incremental
demand for U.S. Treasuries
▪ Tokenization can potentially improve liquidity in the trading of Treasuries by reducing operational and
settlement frictions
16
Conclusions
▪ Though the overall market for digital assets remains quite small in comparison to traditional
financial assets likes equities or bonds, interest has grown substantially over the past decade
▪ To date, growth in digital assets has created marginal incremental demand for short-dated
Treasuries
− This has so far come primarily though increased use and prevalence of stablecoins
− Institutional adoption of “high-beta” bitcoin and crypto might lead to increased future hedging demand for
Treasuries
▪ Advances in DLT and blockchain offer the promise of a new financial market infrastructure with
“unified ledgers” leading to enhanced operational and economic efficiencies
− There are several ongoing projects and pilots from both private- and public-sector actors to leverage
blockchain technology in the legacy financial market ecosystem, particularly by DTCC and the BIS
− Will likely require the central bank and tokenized USD (CBDC) to play a pivotal role in a future tokenized
payments and settlements infrastructure
▪ Legal and regulatory landscape will need to evolve alongside advances in tokenization of legacy
assets
▪ Operational, legal, and technology risks need to be considered carefully in making design
choices around the technology infrastructure and tokenization
− Projects of study should include the design, nature, and concerns around Treasury tokenization, introduction
of sovereign CBDCs, technology and financial architecture choices, and financial stability considerations
▪ Currently, financial stability risks remain low given the relatively small size of the tokenized
asset market; however, strong growth in tokenized assets could lead to a myriad of financial
instability risks
▪ The way forward should involve a cautious approach spearheaded by a trusted central authority,
with widespread buy-in from private sector participants
17
Bibliography
Stablecoins
▪ Aldasoro, Iñaki, et al. “Stablecoins, Money Market Funds and Monetary Policy.” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2024. (Link)
▪ Baughman, Garth, et al. “The Stable in Stablecoins.” Www.federalreserve.gov, 16 Dec. 2022, (Link)
▪ Gorton, Gary B., and Jeffery Zhang. “Taming Wildcat Stablecoins.” The University of Chicago Law Review, 2021. (Link)
▪ Liao, Gordon Y., and John Caramichael. “Stablecoins: Growth Potential and Impact on Banking.” International Finance Discussion
Paper, vol. 2022, no. 1334, 31 Jan. 2022, pp. 1–26. (Link)
▪ “Stablecoins Have Been Unstable. Why?” Moody’s, 2023, (Link)
▪ S&P Global. “Stablecoins: A Deep Dive into Valuation and Depegging.” September 2023. (Link)
▪ “Transparency.” Tether.to, (Link)
▪ Watsky, Cy, et al. “Primary and Secondary Markets for Stablecoins.” FEDS Notes, 23 Feb. 2024. (Link)
Household and Industry Adoption
▪ BitcoinTreasuries.com. “BitcoinTreasuries.com.” Bitbo.io, 2024, (Link)
▪ “Crypto-Assets: Implications for Consumers, Investors, and Businesses.” U.S. Department of Treasury, September 2022. (Link)
▪ Derrick, Allison. “Crypto Assets in U.S. Macroeconomic Statistics.” U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2023.
▪ “Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2023.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 2024. (Link)
▪ Weber, Michael, et al. “Do You Even Crypto, Bro? Cryptocurrencies in Household Finance.” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2023. (Link)
Blockchain and settlement
▪ Agarwal, Nipun, et al. “Blockchain Application to Financial Market Clearing and Settlement Systems.” Journal of Risk and Financial
Management, vol. 16, no. 10, 20 Oct. 2023, pp. 452–452. (Link)
▪ “Digital Dollar Project and DTCC: Security Settlement Pilot Exploring Post-Trade Security Settlement with a U.S. Central Bank Digital
Currency.” Nov. 2022. (Link DTCC Pilot Report - FINAL EDITS)
▪ “Cryptocurrency Market Capitalizations | CoinMarketCap.” CoinMarketCap, 2024, (Link)
▪ “Economics of Blockchain-Based Securities Settlement.” Research in International Business and Finance, vol. 64, Jan. 2023. (Link)
▪ Son, Bumho, and Huisu Jang. “Economics of Blockchain-Based Securities Settlement.” Research in International Business and Finance,
vol. 64, Jan. 2023, p. 101842 (Link)
▪ “Spot Archives.” The Block, 2024, (Link)
18
Bibliography
Tokenization
▪ Aldasoro, Iñaki, et al. BIS Bulletin No 72 “The Tokenisation Continuum.” BIS, 11 Apr. 2023. (Link)
▪ Basar, Shanny. “DTCC, Digital Asset Tokenize US Treasuries for Collateral.” Markets Media, 23 Sept. 2024. (Link)
▪ Carapella, Francesca, et al. “Tokenization: Overview and Financial Stability Implications.” Finance and Economics Discussion
Series, no. 2023-060r1, Dec. 2023, pp. 1–29. Federal Reserve Board. (Link)
▪ DTCC, “Digital Dollar Project and DTCC: Security Settlement Pilot”, 2022
▪ “III. Blueprint for the Future Monetary System: Improving the Old, Enabling the New.” Www.bis.org, 20 June 2023, (Link)
▪ Lee, Michael, et al. “Optimal Design of Tokenized Markets.” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2021. (Link)
▪ O’Neill, Andrew. “Your Three Minutes in Digital Assets: Tokenized Treasuries Offer a Path to On-Chain Financial Markets.” S&P
Global, 2024. (Link)
▪ “RWA.xyz | Tokenized Real-World Asset Analytics.” Rwa.xyz, 2024, (Link)
▪ “Unlocking Collateral Mobility through Tokenization: US Treasuries Use Case.” Canton Network, 2024. (Link)
▪ Watsky, Cy, et al. “Tokenized Assets on Public Blockchains: How Transparent Is the Blockchain?” FEDS Notes, 3 Apr.
2024.(Link)
Implications for financial stability
▪ Azar, Pablo D, et al. “The Financial Stability Implications of Digital Assets.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September 2022.
(Link)
▪ “Building the Digital Asset Securities Ecosystem.” Boston Consulting Group, May 2024. (Link)
▪ “The Financial Stability Implication of Tokenisation.” Financial Stability Board, October 2024. (Link)
Regulatory efforts
▪ The White House. “FACT SHEET: White House Releases First-Ever Comprehensive Framework for Responsible Development of
Digital Assets.” The White House, 16 Sept. 2022, (Link)
19
Appendix
Cryptocurrency and blockchain
▪ Cryptocurrency is an internet-based medium of exchange which uses cryptographical
functions and distributed database technology to conduct financial transactions
▪ Cryptocurrencies leverage distributed ledger technology (DLT) technology to gain
decentralization, transparency, and immutability
− Bitcoin is a one example of such a cryptocurrency or digital cash system; the history of every Bitcoin is
known and kept in a blockchain, a distributed ledger in cyberspace using a cryptographic network to provide
a single and verifiable source of truth
− One challenge of decentralized networks for payments is that it is more difficult to exercise
government/regulatory oversight compared to a centralized ledger; this is especially true for
cryptocurrencies where access is permissionless
▪ Blockchain is a subset of DLT and allows untrusting parties with common interests to co-
create a permanent, unchangeable, and transparent record of exchange, and processing
without relying on a central authority
The Blockchain Distributed Ledger Model has the Potential to Improve
Speed and Efficiency of Financial Flows
Financial Intermediaries (Today) Financial Protocol (Emerging)
+ Requires trusted, centralized intermediaries + No (or fewer) intermediaries required
+ Batch clearing and settlement + Near real-time processing and management
+ Higher fees and costly infrastructure + Lower fees and reduced infrastructure
Clearing House
(Centralized Ledger) Financial Network
(Distributed Ledger)
Source: Citi
21
Key features of DLT/blockchain
▪ Distributed ledger technology (DLT) is an evolving technology with many designs and
configurations, but generally includes four key features
1. Distributed Nature of the Ledger
− Perhaps the most important innovation of DLT is the elimination of reliance on a single
centralized record keeper; instead, control over the ledger lies with the network participants
− At any point in time, there exists only one version of the ledger with each network participant
owning a full and up-to-date copy of the ledger
2. Consensus Mechanism
− No single entity can amend or approve new additions to the ledger; instead, a predefined
consensus mechanism is used to validate all new entries to the ledger
− The consensus mechanism is specified in the design of the DLT and creates a set of rules or
protocol for determining the legitimacy of new entries
3. Cryptographic Mechanism
− Each transaction entry into a ledger is encrypted and includes a timestamp and digital
signature; this allows for detection of tampering with past transaction data
4. Smart contracts
− Blockchain improves automation by allowing for the execution of rules-based transactions with
the aim of improving speed, security, and innovation
22
How do blockchains work?
A transaction is A block that represents The block is sent to Nodes validate the
requested the transaction is every node in the transaction
created network
?
Nodes receive a The block is added The transaction
reward for the Proof to the existing is complete
of Work blockchain
23
Financial stability considerations: risk of runs on stablecoins
▪ Stablecoins have increasingly elected to hold significant short-dated US Treasury collateral, and we expect regulatory
efforts in the years to come to encourage this trend
▪ Despite the improved collateral backing of stablecoins, significant risks remain. Runs on stablecoins have been a
common occurrence in recent years, with stablecoins losing their peg to the U.S. dollar or collapsing entirely1,2,3
▪ A collapse of a major stablecoin like Tether could result in a “fire-sale” of their U.S. Treasuries holdings
▪ If history serves as any guide, stablecoins will need to be regulated like narrow banks or money market
funds to prevent contagion of stress in stablecoin markets to broader financial markets and the Treasury
market
May 2022 March 2023
Terra’s Stablecoin (USTC)
The collapse of Silicon
collapsed following a run in May
Valley Bank caused USD Coin
2022, erasing $20bn in market cap
(USDC) to lose its peg, as a
overnight, raising concerns over
significant portion of USDC’s
unregulated algorithmic
collateral was held as deposits
stablecoins with inadequate
at Silicon Valley Bank
collateralization
Curve Finance, a large
The collapse of FTX caused
holder of Stablecoins and
Tether and other Stablecoins
supplier of Stablecoin
to depeg, as worries over
liquidity, faced hacks in
industry contagion spreading
that resulted in losses.
to other crypto exchanges
This followed Tether
caused investors to withdraw
losing it’s peg on Curve
Stablecoin funds at <$1
Finance’s 3pool platform
November 2022 June 2023
1 Moody’s, “Stablecoins have been unstable, Why?”, 2023
2 BIS, “Public information and stablecoin runs”, 2024 24
3 NYFRB, “Runs on Stablecoins”, 2023
If history serves as any guide, stablecoins will need to be
regulated like narrow banks or money market funds
▪ While stablecoins currently elect to hold
Lessons learned from the “Wild Cat” Era of
significant short-dated U.S. Treasury
Banking1: Prior to a centralized monetary
collateral, it is not required authority, banks in the U.S. used to issue their own
individual banknotes that were poorly
collateralized, prone to runs, and regularly traded
▪ Stablecoins are also currently functioning
at a discount in secondary markets. In responds to
like a form of private, “on-chain” money these issues, most state governments began
requiring these notes be backed one-for-one with
government bonds. Ultimately, difficulty
▪ “Private money” during the wildcat banking
interchanging numerous forms of paper currency
era in the 1800s was regularly subject to paved the way to the National Bank Act of 1963
and ultimately the creation of the U.S. dollar as the
panics, collapses in value, and ultimately
only national-level currency in circulation
required the government to step and issue a
single unified form of money (Greenbacks)
Lessons learned from the runs on MMFs in
▪ Prime money market funds holding collateral ‘08: Despite holding shares in what had been
other than short-dated US Tresuries traditionally considered a "risk free investment",
prime money market funds experienced significant
experienced runs during 2008 and 2020
runs during the 2008 crisis as a drop in prices on
short-dated financial commercial paper tanked
▪ History indicates that stablecoins cannot confidence in the solvency of the money market
funds that held them. Despite the addition of gate
function as private money, and will
fees to discourage runs, prime money market
ultimately need to be strictly regulated like funds again experienced runs in 2020 when prices
on commercial paper again plummeted. The
government money market funds are today
lesson, repeated, is that a "risk-free"
to hold risk-free collateral
investment vehicle will only behave as such
when backed by actual risk-free collateral -
which is short dated U.S. Treasuries
1 Gary Gorden et al, “Taming Wildcat Stablecoins”, 2021
25

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/4-12.28.21_crypto_seminar-done.pdf
Cryptocurrency and
Blockchain:
An Introduction to
Digital Currencies and
DEFI
How to Buy, Trade, and Mine
Crypto securely and safely
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
• Introduction
Course
• What is Cryptocurrency
Outline
• What is the Blockchain
• How to Buy, Trade, and Mine Crypto securely
• Basics of Cryptocurrency security
• Advanced Cryptocurrency security
• How to protect your digital assets/investments
• Cyber attacks and preventive countermeasures –
• Introduction to Private Banking
• Intro to HODL best practices
• What is a Node and why should you have one?
• Introduction to DEFI
• How to research and evaluate cryptocurrencies risk vs reward
• Introduction to NFTs
• Best practices and conclusion
The idea is to make things simple
enough for anyone to understand. In
doin"Ng oththisi,n ygo ius mcaonr ea cpqouwireer afu dl etheapn
undaenr sitdaenad winhgo osfe t thime teo hpaics ycooum'ree. “
studying.
Victor Hugo
Nobel Prize laureate
Richard Feynman
According to the philosopher Aristotle,
money has to respect three main criteria:
1. A medium of exchange.
2. A unit of account.
3. A store of value.
D• isclaimer
All Content on this site is information of a general nature and does not
address the circumstances of any particular individual or entity. Nothing in
the Site constitutes professional and/or financial advice, nor does any
information on the Site constitute a comprehensive or complete statement
of the matters discussed or the law relating thereto. Simply Crypto is not a
fiduciary by virtue of any person’s use of or access to the Site or Content.
You alone assume the sole responsibility of evaluating the merits and risks
associated with the use of any information or other Content on the Site
before making any decisions based on such information or other Content. In
exchange for using the Site, you agree not to hold Simply Crypto, its affiliates
or any third party service provider liable for any possible claim for damages
arising from any decision you make based on information or other Content
made available to you through the Site and presentation.
• Born in Bronx and grew up in
Jamaica Queens.
• Extensive experience with
Crypto and DEFI
• Started mining crypto in 2012
• Taught Economics and Tech
• Avid reader and pilot
Summary & QA
What is
Cryptocurrency?
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
1. What is cryptocurrency?
W• hat is Cryptocurrency?
•
Cryptocurrency is a form of payment that can be exchanged online for goods
and services. Many companies have issued their own currencies, often
called tokens, and these can be traded specifically for the good or service
that the company provides. Think of them as you would arcade tokens or
casino chips. You’ll need to exchange real currency for the cryptocurrency to
•
access the good or service.
Cryptocurrencies work using a technology called blockchain. Blockchain is a
decentralized technology spread across many computers that manages and
records transactions. Part of the appeal of this technology is its security.
What is the Block Chain?
How many cryptocurrencies are there?
What are they worth?
•
•
More than 15,000 different cryptocurrencies are traded publicly, according
to CoinMarketCap.com, a market research website. And cryptocurrencies
continue to proliferate. The total value of all cryptocurrencies on Dec. 17
2021, was about $2.1 trillion, having fallen off an all-time high above $2.9
trillion weeks earlier. The total value of all bitcoins, the most popular digital
currency, was pegged at about $868.7 billion
Crypto Assets Vs Crypto Currencies
Crypto assets – Bitcoin (BTC)
•
digital assets which use cryptographic techniques to generate a
•
medium of exchange or property
Crypto assets are
How is virtual currency treated for Federal income tax purposes?
• . Cryptocurrencies, utility coins, security tokens
•
Virtual currency is treated as property and general tax principles applicable to property
transactions apply to transactions using virtual currency. For more information on the tax
treatment of virtual currency, see Notice 2014-21. For more information on the tax
treatment of property transactions, see Publication 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of
Cryptocurrency All other Alternative (ALT) Coins
• Assets.
• –
cryptographic techniques for secure medium of exchange
Form of payment that can be exchanged online for goods and services, and utilize
How many cryptocurrencies are there?
What are they worth?
•
•
More than 15,000 different cryptocurrencies are traded publicly, according
to CoinMarketCap.com, a market research website. And cryptocurrencies
continue to proliferate. The total value of all cryptocurrencies on Dec. 17
2021, was about $2.1 trillion, having fallen off an all-time high above $2.9
trillion weeks earlier. The total value of all bitcoins, the most popular digital
currency, was pegged at about $868.7 billion
How many cryptocurrencies are there?
O• pportunity
Present the offer…
Key History and Milestones
•
•
Bitcoin started 12 years ago in 2009
•
Only 21 million Bitcoin exist to be mined or bought
•
$100 early investment would value over $10 Million today!
•
It took four years in 2013 for the value to reach $1,000
Today only 90% of all Bitcoin are available to be purchased
Key Characteristics of Bitcoin
Fungible
•
Divisible
•
: One unit is identical to another unit.
Acceptable
•
: Can be divided into smaller units of value.
Limited Supply
•
: Widely accepted as medium of exchange.
Uniform
•
: Supply is capped and constant.
Portable:
•
: All versions of the same denomination have the same value.
Durable
•
Can be transported and exchanged.
: Can be reused without deterioration.
$68,789.63
https://www.marketwatch.com/story/bitcoin-
surges-to-over-10000-in-biggest-single-day-move-
since-april-2019-10-26
Bitcoin is set to reach new high!
What do the charts show?
How many cryptocurrencies are there?
Title and Content Layout with Chart
Dow’s Best Stock Can’t Touch Bitcoin
BTC 135% gain tops performers from the Dow Jones Industrial Average, S&P 500, and Nasdaq –which are Cisco Systems (CSCO), Xerox(XRX), and Beyond Meat (BYND)
#7. The risk of inflation today!
https://www.bitcoinprice.com/predictions/
How high will Bitcoin rise?
Shervin Pishevar is a venture capitalist and angel investor who co-founded
Hyperloop One and Sherpa Capital. He has also made investments in several
companies including big names such as $A1ir0B0n,0b0a0n db yU tbheer. end of 2021
Pishevar has called for Bitcoin to reach via Twitter.
The prediction came not long after a December 2020 meeting with MicroStrategy
CEO Michael Saylor, whose company invested more than $1 billion in Bitcoin during
2020.
500,000 by 2030
Winklevoss twins – the famous Bitcoin billionaires have said Bitcoin has the
potential to reach a price of $ , which would put its
market cap on par with that of gold (around $9 trillion).
Tyler Winklevoss said, “Our thesis is that bitcoin is gold 2.0, that it will
disrupt gold, and if it does that, it has to have a market cap of 9 trillion, so
we think it could price one day at $US500,000 of bitcoin.”
Summary & QA
How do you buy,
trade, or mine
cryptocurrency
securely?
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
Where can you buy Crypto safely?
Where can you buy Crypto safely?
Security preparation
1. Assure your computers are secure
2. Run Malwarebytes or similar scanner or
run private banking session on virtual
machine such as Tails OS
Shervin Pishevar is a venture capitalist and angel investor who co-founded
Hyperloop One and Sherpa Capital. He has also made investments in several
companies including big names such as $A1ir0B0n,0b0a0n db yU tbheer. end of 2021
Pishevar has called for Bitcoin to reach via Twitter.
The prediction came not long after a December 2020 meeting with MicroStrategy
CEO Michael Saylor, whose company invested more than $1 billion in Bitcoin during
2020.
500,000 by 2030
Winklevoss twins – the famous Bitcoin billionaires have said Bitcoin has the
potential to reach a price of $ , which would put its
market cap on par with that of gold (around $9 trillion).
Tyler Winklevoss said, “Our thesis is that bitcoin is gold 2.0, that it will
disrupt gold, and if it does that, it has to have a market cap of 9 trillion, so
we think it could price one day at $US500,000 of bitcoin.”
How do you buy Crypto Securely?
7 steps
reputable
KYC
1. Select a exchange
2. Setup account and perform (drivers
Secret Phrase
license or passport)
two factor
3. Save this is important
SMS or Authenticator
4. Setup authentication and secure
secure
passwords –
5. Login to exchange on internet
6. Select
connected device (computer or mobile)
cold storage & Log Off
and purchase Crypto Asset or Currency
7. Move Crypto to your
How do you move Crypto from
Hot Wallet to Cold Storage?
1. Login to Ledger Live>Click on Accounts
secure on the Blockchain.
a. Select type of crypto you wish to
Copy
secure
Receive Address
2. Login to exchange on internet
connected device (computer or mobile)
3. Select the crypto you wish to move and
paste the address you copied for the
Ledger. (Be sure to perform small tests)
5. Log Off
4. Verify crypto was received into account
Capex Break Even (Months) for Bitcoin Mining ASICs Units - 40TH
Percentage Uptime
)hWk/$(
ecirP
yticirtcelE
35% 40% 45% 50% 55% 60% 65% 70% 75% 80% 85% 90% 95% 100%
0NaN NaN 24 18 14 12 11 9 9 8 7 7 6 6
0.01NaN NaN NaN 23 17 14 12 10 9 8 8 8 6 6
0.02NaN NaN NaN NaN 23 16 13 11 10 9 8 8 7 6
0.03NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN 16 13 11 10 9 8 8 7
0.04NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN 18 14 11 10 9 8 8
0.05NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN 15 12 11 9 9
0.06NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN NaN 14 11 10
BTC price $40k; 40Th Mth difficulty +6%
Calculations provided by Signature Deals,
LLC
Solar is the way!
30000 w x 365 11mil yr = 24
acres - $30 million - potential
50% fed and state credit - sell
tax credits
credit vs rebate may change
Example per machine w/o solar
in 12 months
12mil/400watts per panel
Summary & QA
Basics of
Cryptocurrency
security?
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
Securing your Bitcoin Transaction
$5 trillion market cap by 2028 -
Cameron Winklevoss said, “We’ve always felt
that Bitcoin, given its properties, is gold 2.0 —
it disrupts gold. Gold is scarce, Bitcoin is
actually fixed. Bitcoin is way more portable
and way more divisible. At a $300 bln market
cap, it’s certainly seen a lot of price
appreciation, but gold is at $6 tln and if Bitcoin
disrupting gold is true and it plays out … then
you can see 10 to 20 times appreciation
because there is a significant delta still.”.
https://www.bitcoinprice.com/predictions/
How high will Bitcoin rise?
https://www.bitcoinprice.com/predictions/
How high will Bitcoin rise?
Shervin Pishevar is a venture capitalist and angel investor who co-founded
Hyperloop One and Sherpa Capital. He has also made investments in several
companies including big names such as $A1ir0B0n,0b0a0n db yU tbheer. end of 2021
Pishevar has called for Bitcoin to reach via Twitter.
The prediction came not long after a December 2020 meeting with MicroStrategy
CEO Michael Saylor, whose company invested more than $1 billion in Bitcoin during
2020.
500,000 by 2030
Winklevoss twins – the famous Bitcoin billionaires have said Bitcoin has the
potential to reach a price of $ , which would put its
market cap on par with that of gold (around $9 trillion).
Tyler Winklevoss said, “Our thesis is that bitcoin is gold 2.0, that it will
disrupt gold, and if it does that, it has to have a market cap of 9 trillion, so
we think it could price one day at $US500,000 of bitcoin.”
O• pportunity
Present the offer…
Summary & QA
Advanced
Cryptocurrency
security?
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
Regulatory Risk of Being Wallet
Hacking Risk
Risk Copied Security
Criminal Exchange Cold Wallet
Scaling Risk
Activity Platform Risk Failure
Block Chain No Centralized
Price Volatility Liquidity Risk
Failure Support
Shervin Pishevar is a venture capitalist and angel investor who co-founded
Hyperloop One and Sherpa Capital. He has also made investments in several
companies including big names such as $A1ir0B0n,0b0a0n db yU tbheer. end of 2021
Pishevar has called for Bitcoin to reach via Twitter.
The prediction came not long after a December 2020 meeting with MicroStrategy
CEO Michael Saylor, whose company invested more than $1 billion in Bitcoin during
2020.
500,000 by 2030
Winklevoss twins – the famous Bitcoin billionaires have said Bitcoin has the
potential to reach a price of $ , which would put its
market cap on par with that of gold (around $9 trillion).
Tyler Winklevoss said, “Our thesis is that bitcoin is gold 2.0, that it will
disrupt gold, and if it does that, it has to have a market cap of 9 trillion, so
we think it could price one day at $US500,000 of bitcoin.”
Shervin Pishevar is a venture capitalist and angel investor who co-founded
Hyperloop One and Sherpa Capital. He has also made investments in several
companies including big names such as $A1ir0B0n,0b0a0n db yU tbheer. end of 2021
Pishevar has called for Bitcoin to reach via Twitter.
The prediction came not long after a December 2020 meeting with MicroStrategy
CEO Michael Saylor, whose company invested more than $1 billion in Bitcoin during
2020.
500,000 by 2030
Winklevoss twins – the famous Bitcoin billionaires have said Bitcoin has the
potential to reach a price of $ , which would put its
market cap on par with that of gold (around $9 trillion).
Tyler Winklevoss said, “Our thesis is that bitcoin is gold 2.0, that it will
disrupt gold, and if it does that, it has to have a market cap of 9 trillion, so
we think it could price one day at $US500,000 of bitcoin.”
Summary & QA
How to research
risk and reward of
crypto currencies
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
Technical Analysis
• “Technical'' refers to analyzing the past trading activity and
price variations of an asset, which according to technical
analysts, might be useful predictors of future price
movements of an asset. It can be used for any asset with
historical trading data, which means stocks, futures,
commodities, currencies and cryptocurrencies.
Technical Analysis
Technical Analysis
What kind of trader are you?
Key Metrics
• Price
• Change
• Low/High
• Trading Volume
• Market Rank
• Market Cap
• Fully Diluted Market Cap
Intro to
Decentralized
Finance?
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
Summary & QA
Intro to
Non-Fungible Tokens
NFTs
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
What is an NFT?
• A non-fungible token is a unique and non-
interchangeable unit of data stored on a
blockchain, a form of digital ledger. NFTs can
be associated with reproducible digital files
such as photos, videos, and audio.
Summary & QA
Best Practices and
Conclusion
Global, Decentralized and Unstoppable.
$5 trillion market cap by 2028 -
$5 trillion market cap by 2028 -
Cameron Winklevoss said, “We’ve always felt
that Bitcoin, given its properties, is gold 2.0 —
it disrupts gold. Gold is scarce, Bitcoin is
actually fixed. Bitcoin is way more portable
and way more divisible. At a $300 bln market
cap, it’s certainly seen a lot of price
appreciation, but gold is at $6 tln and if Bitcoin
disrupting gold is true and it plays out … then
you can see 10 to 20 times appreciation
because there is a significant delta still.”.
$5 trillion market cap by 2028 -
What price would you sell your Bitcoin?
Regulation
is coming
soon!!
Summary & QA

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/6schueffelgroenewegbaldegger2019_crypto-encyclopedia_eng.pdf
COVER
This page intentionally left blank
THE
CRYPTO ENCYCLOPEDIA
Coins, Tokens and Digital Assets from A to Z
Patrick Schueffel
Nikolaj Groeneweg
Rico Baldegger
Bern
Copying and reprinting. This book contains proprietary information,
which is protected by copyright. All rights are reserved. However,
material in this booklet may be reproduced by any means for educational
and scientific purposes without fee or permission with the exception of
reproduction by services that collect fees for delivery of documents. This
permission is subject to the following conditions: (i) the customary
acknowledgment of the source is given; (ii) the material may not be used
for any commercial purposes without the author’s prior written consent;
(iii) the copies must retain any copyrights or other intellectual property
notices contained in the original material. This consent does not extend to
other kinds of copying for advertising or promotional purposes, or for
resale. Requests for permission for commercial use of material should be
addressed to the Professor Patrick Schueffel, School of Management
Fribourg (HEG-FR), Institute of Finance, Chemin du Musée 4, 1700
Fribourg, Switzerland. Requests can also be made by e-mail to:
patrick.schueffel@hefr.ch
© 2019 by Patrick Schueffel. All rights reserved.
In cooperation with
School of Management Fribourg (HEG-FR)
HES-SO // University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland
Visit the School of Management Fribourg home page at
http://www.heg-fr.ch/EN
Published in Switzerland
ISBN 978-2-940384-47-1
PREFACE
The subject of cryptocurrencies, tokens and digital assets is an
emerging field. It attracts an increasing amount of attention in
the world of business as well as academia.
When a new subject is developing, it is important to use one
common language, otherwise unavoidably misunderstandings
emerge, and communication would become error prone and thus
inefficient. Under those circumstances progress would hardly be
possible, and the advancement of the field would seriously be
hampered.
Throughout many talks at conferences, in sessions with
investors, throughout lectures at university, and in further
education courses for practitioners, we came across many
occasions of misunderstandings. These misunderstandings gave
rise to the thought of sharing our point of view when discussing
crypto.
In order to help creating a shared terminology we wrote this
book. Drawing on a wealth of experience in the field of
cryptocurrencies as founders, entrepreneurs, educators, and
researchers we intended this book as a single, consolidated and
authoritative source on that subject. We hope it will serve this
purpose
Patrick Schueffel
Nikolaj Groeneweg
Rico Baldegger
This page intentionally left blank
1
2FA (two factor A two factor authentication is a process of
authentication, confirming a user's alleged identity by
TFA, two step using a combination of two different
verification) components, for instance a password and a
physical token (e.g. > PIN and credit card).
51% attack 51% attack is the name for a concerted
(fiftyone percent attack on a > distributed ledger system
attack) where > miners controlling more than 50%
of the system's > hashing power can
m anipulate transactions.
accelerator An accelerator is a time-limited, cohort-
(startup based program, supporting > startup
accelerator, seed companies in their business endeavors. the
accelerators) program typically includes mentorship and
educational components and is generally
concluded by a public > pitch event or
> demo day for potential investors.
accidental fork An accidental fork is a specific form of a
> fork which occurs if due to coding errors
newer versions of generated > blocks are
not truly compatible with older ones.
address The address is a unique identifier which is
created by > hashing a > public key and
describes the digital address where > coins
or > tokens can be transferred to or where
coins, tokens or > smart contracts can be
s tored.
2
Airdrop An airdrop is an allocation process for
distributing > tokens to a group of token
holders after an > ICO has been completed
o r a > fork has gone live.
algo trading see > algorithmic trading
algorithm An algorithm is a set of rules or a
procedure to be followed for solving a
m athematical problem.
algorithmic Algorithmic trading is a trading method
trading which makes use of automated
> algorithms and pre-programmed trading
instructions, such as time, price, and
volume to execute tranches of a larger
o rder over time.
Alt see > Altcoin
Altcoin An Altcoin (umbrella term encompassing
"alt" for "alternative" and "coin") is a
labelling for a cryptocurrency that is
a lternative to Bitcoin.
alternative coin see > Altcoin
Altfi (alternative Altfi is a term describing financial
finance) channels, processes and instruments that
have developed outside of the conventional
finance system comprising regulated banks
a nd capital markets.
3
AML (anti-money AML is a set of measures, laws and/or
laundering) regulations designed to prohibit the
practice of > money laundering.
angel investor An angel investor is an affluent or high net
(business angel) worth individual who provides early capital
for a business > startup, usually in
exchange for convertible debt or ownership
equity. Oftentimes this individual also
provided knowledge and contacts for the
s tart-up.
anonymization Anonymization is the process changing
(data data in such a way that identifiers are being
anonymization) encrypted, removed, substituted, distorted,
generalised or aggregated so that data
p rivacy is ensured.
API (application An API is a set of functions and protocols
programming for building application software. It defines
interface) methods of communication between
various software components and provides
access to data of an operating system,
application, or other service. It facilitates
developing computer programs by
providing building blocks which can then
be assembled by the developer.
ASIC An ASIC is an integrated circuit designed
(Application- for a specific application, rather than one
specific integrated produced for genera purpose.
c ircuit)
4
ASIC Miner ASIC mining is the process of > mining
> cryptocurrencies using > ASIC
equipment allowing for a significantly
faster production speed than with an
ordinary desktop or laptop as these systems
are specifically manufactured for this
p urpose.
bagholder A bag holder is a term describing an
investor who holds a position in an asset
that decreases in value, until virtually
worthless with only small chances of
regaining value, e.g. holding a
cryptocurrency beyond a pump and dump
c rash.
bank book see > ledger
BCH see > Bitcoin Cash
bid-ask spread see > spread
Bitcoin Bitcoin is a > blockchain based
> cryptocurrency and a > digital payment
system invented by an unknown with the
alias > Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008.
Bitcoin cash (BCH) Bitcoin Cash is a cryptocurrency resulting
from a > hard fork of > Bitcoin which took
effect on 1 August 2017 in order to
increase Bitcoin's block sizes.
5
Bitcoin halving see > halving
Bitcoin mining Bitcoin mining is the process of creating
and releasing new > Bitcoin currency. This
is done by verifying and adding
transactions to the > blockchain as rewards
for doing computational work.
block A block is an unalterable set of data
making up a pivotal component of the
> blockchain by recording the most recent
transactions that have not yet been
r ecorded by any previous block.
block height The block height is a metric used to
describe the number of sequentially added
blocks in the > blockchain between any
given block and the > genesis block
block reward The block reward is the compensation that
a miner can claim for creating a > block on
the > blockchain.
block size Block size is a value providing the amount
of data that is stored in any given > block
on the > blockchain.
6
blockchain The blockchain is a publicly accessible
> distributed ledger that was initially
designed and implemented to enable
> Bitcoin transactions. It is a piece of IT
infrastructure that serves as a database
which is used to keep a continuously
g rowing list of records, so called > blocks.
bonus A bonus is reward for a > cryptocurrency
investor, typically granted throughout the
> pre-sales or early > ICO stages of a
cryptocurrency project and thus awarding
e arly investments.
bot see > trading bot
BTC see > Bitcoin
burn see > coin burn
burn reserve A burn reserve describes the lot of tokens
that are not distributed during > ICO and
which will be burned in order to avoid
d ilution.
buy wall A buy wall is an expression describing a
situation when the amount/size of buy
orders for a particular > coin or > token is
significantly larger than the number of sell
o rders.
7
Byzantine fault The Byzantine fault is a condition of a
(error avalanche) distributed computing system where
components may fail, yet imperfect
information exists on whether a component
has failed and if so which one(s)
Byzantine fault Byzantine fault tolerance is the ability of a
tolerance computing system to cope with the
questionable reliability of data caused by
t he > Byzantine fault.
CCI30 Crypto The CCI30 Crypto Currencies Index is an
Currencies Index index tracking the 30 largest
> cryptocurrencies by
> market capitalization.
central ledger A central ledger is a single principal
(centralized ledger, repository that keeps records of
general ledger) transactions of an entity and is typically
controlled by a single person or a narrowly
d efined group of individuals.
circulating supply The circulating supply is the amount of
coins that are circulating in the market, i.e.
which are in the general public's hand; if
tokens are > pre-mined the circulating
supply will equal to the hard cap after
> ICO.
8
coin Coin is commonly used alternative
e xpression for > cryptocurrencies.
coin burn A coin burn describes the irreversible
process of sending > tokens of
> cryptocurrency to a > public address
from they can never be retrieved as the
> private keys of such the public address is
u nobtainable.
cold storage A cold storage is an electronic device that
can store > cryptocurrencies independent
of having an online connection to the
Internet and thus reduces the likelihood of
unauthorized access, hacking attacks, and
other vulnerabilities that an online system
i s otherwise susceptible to.
cold wallet A cold wallet is a > digital wallet
e mploying > cold storage technology.
9
collectables see > NFT
( collectable tokens)
Colored Coin A Colored Coin is an expression describing
a set of methods for representing and
managing real world assets using the
> Bitcoin > blockchain infrastructure.
commit A commit is a command used in > Github
to save changes in a code or project to a
l ocal repository.
comparison site A comparison site is a Website that
compares the scope and price of a
particular product or service across
d ifferent providers.
complementary A complementary currency is a currency
currency which is not a legal tender, but
complementing national currencies, i.e.
> Fiat money.
computationally see > Turing complete
universal
10
consensus A consensus mechanism describes the
mechanism actions necessary to achieve agreement on
d ata in distributed systems.
consensus process see > consensus mechanism
Cosmos Network The Cosmos Network is a decentralized
network of independent, scalable, and
i nteroperable > blockchains.
crowd sale see > ICO
crowdfunding Crowdfunding is one specific form of
> crowdsourcing where funding for a
project or business is raised from a number
of people, oftentimes via campaigns
l aunched via the Internet.
crypto exchange see > cryptocurrency exchange
crypto index Cryptocurrency Index (CRIX) is an index
(CRIX) comprising 20 constituents from the crypto
currency markets.
crypto protocol A crypto protocol is the underlying set of
rules upon which > Dapps are built;
prominent crypto protocols are
> Ethereum, NEO, Stellar, Lisk, QTUM
etc.
11
cryptocurrency A cryptocurrency is a > digital currency in
(math based which > encryption techniques are used to
currency) control the generation of units of currency
and verify the transfer of funds, operating
independently of one single central unit.
Cryptocurrency businesses oftentimes raise
m oney through > ICOs.
cryptocurrency A cryptocurrency exchange is a platform
exchange (crypto that provides users with the possibility to
exchange, digital trade > cryptocurrencies for other
currency cryptocurrencies and/or > Fiat money.
exchange)
cryptographic see > nonce
nonce
Custodian A custodian is a person or entity who has
r esponsibility for taking care of assets.
cybersecurity Cybersecurity are the measures,
technologies, processes, and practices
taken to protect a computer or computer
system against unauthorized access or
a ttack or damage.
12
Cypherpunk A cypherpunk is a person that actively
advocates the widespread usage of
cryptography and privacy-enhancing
technologies as a means to social and
p olitical change.
DAG (directed A DAG is a > directed graph such that
acyclic graph) staring at any node and following the
vertices along their direction, there is no
way to return to the original starting node;
DAGs are being used as an alternative
> DLT to > blockchain technology.
DAICO The DAICO (umbrella term encompassing
(Decentralized “> DAO” and “> ICO”) is a process of
Autonomous decentralized capital investment: investors
Initial Coin retain the control of the capital requested
Offering) by the project team by approving certain
m ilestones, so called > TAPs
DAO The DAO (Decentralized Autonomous
Organization) was an organization setup to
pool funds to develop technologies
supporting new decentralized business
models; after being hacked in June 2016 it
c eased to exist in late 2016.
DAPP A dapp is an application that runs on a
(decentralized decentralized > P2P network, such as
application) > Ethereum.
13
data see > anonymization
anonymization
database shard see > sharding
deanonymization Deanonymization is the process of
changing data in such a way that it
becomes identifiable; it is the reverse
p rocess of > anonymization.
decryption Decryption is the process of decoding an
incomprehensible message or information
into another form which can be easily
understood by third parties; it is the reverse
process of > encryption.
demo day A demo day is a day on which > startup
companies present their businesses to
potential investors and other partners.
Oftentimes it is seen as the “graduation”
date for a cohort of firms participating in a
> incubator or > accelerator program.
democratization of Democratization of finance is a term
finance describing the process by which financial
services and products become more
accessible to more people.
DEX (distributed A DEX is a > cryptocurrency exchange
exchange) that operates on a > P2P principle, i.e. in a
decentralized fashion, permitting users to
retain their > cryptocurrencies in their
> digital wallet instead of handing them
over to a central authority.
14
DG (Directed A directed graph is a graph made up of a
Graph) set of vertices (or > nodes) connected by
edges (or lines) that have a direction
associated with them, such that one can
only transition between vertices along the
d irection of the edge connecting them.
diaas (digital Diaas is a service which provides an entity
identity as a with a > digital identity.
s ervice)
digest see > hash
digital asset A digital asset is an asset securitized in a
d igital manner, e.g. by a > token.
digital asset array A digital asset array is a bundle of > digital
( DAA) a ssets, such as > token baskets.
digital currency A digital currency is a type of currency that
(electronic money, is non-physical (i.e. no banknotes and coins
digital money) exist thereof) and which can only be
transmitted via electronic means, typically
allowing for instantaneous transactions and
b orderless transfer of ownership.
15
digital currency see > cryptocurrency exchange
e xchanges
digital identity A digital identity is a set of information
representing an external entity on a
c omputer system.
digital money see > digital currency
digital payment A digital payment is a computer-based
transaction of money authorized
e lectronically on an electronic device.
digital security A digital security is a digital representation
of a security for which ownership is
v erified and recorded using > DLT.
digital security see > DSO
o ffering
digital signature see > signature
16
digital token see > token
digital wallet A digital wallet is an electronic device that
(mobile wallet, stores payment and authentication
mWallet) information and thus permits an individual
to make > electronic payments and/or
> mobile payments. By using digital
wallets users can purchase items on-line
with a computer or use smartphones to
purchase something at a store. Some digital
wallets also permit money transfers among
u sers.
distributed ledger A distributed ledger is a digital system
recording and storing data and which is
consensually shared and synchronized
across a geographically spread network
across multiple sites, institutions and/or
g eographies.
DLT (distributed DLT is a technology based on the principle
l edger technology) > distributed ledgers.
double spending Double spending is a process that exploits
a flaw in a > cryptocurrency system which
allows a user to spend a single > coin
t wice.
17
double-spending A double-spending attack is an attack on a
attack cryptocurrency system aiming to conduct
> double-spending e.g. by conducting a
> 51% attack.
DSO (digital A DSO is a security offering executed,
security offering) recorded and verified using > DLT; DSOs
a re used to issue > digital securities.
ecosystem An ecosystem is a network of interacting
(business individuals and organizations such as
ecosystem) suppliers, producers, competitors, and
other stakeholders that produces goods and
services of value to customers, who are
t hemselves members of the ecosystem.
EEA (Enterprise The EEA is an alliance of organizations
Ethereum developing standards allowing for
Alliance) harmonization and standardization of
> Ethereum applications.
electronic money see > digital currency
18
electronic payment An electronic payment is a payment made
(e-payment, from one party to another via electronic
Epayment, means without the direct intervention of
electronic funds human staff and instead of using cash or
t ransfer) c heck, in person or by mail.
EMV (Europay, EMV is a global technical standard set
Mastercard and forth by Europay, MasterCard, and Visa for
Visa) credit and debit cards as well as for
payment terminals and automated teller
m achines that can accept them.
encryption Encryption is the process of encoding a
message or information into another form
which cannot be easily understood by
a nyone except authorized parties.
Enterprise see > EEA
E thereum Alliance
ERC ERC is an abbreviation for Ethereum
Request for Comment; answers proposed
to ERCs can serve as new > token
s tandards
19
ERC-1400 ERC-1400 is a suggested standard for
> security tokens so that issuers, investors,
> KYC providers, > digital wallets,
> cryptocurrency exchanges, regulators
and developers can work together using the
i dentical framework.
ERC-20 ERC-20 is a quasi standard comprising a
list of rules set forth for all > Ethereum
> tokens, so that developers can accurately
predict how new tokens will function
w ithin the Ethereum system.
ERC-721 ERC-721 is a quasi standard for non-
fungible tokens comprising a list of rules
set forth for > non-fungible > Ethereum
> tokens, so that developers can accurately
predict how tokens will function within the
> Ethereum system that bear unique
i nformation.
error avalanche see > Byzantine fault
20
Ether Ether is a > cryptocurrency > token which
can be transferred between accounts and
used to compensate > Ethereum > nodes
f or computations performed.
Ethereum Ethereum is a public > blockchain based
decentralized computing platform for
a pplications that run > smart contracts.
Ethereum Classic Ethereum Classic is a decentralized
computing platform that runs
> smart contracts; it came into existence as
a > hard fork from > Ethereum in 2017 but
is not backwards compatible with
> Ethereum.
exchange see > crypto exchange
Fabric see > Hyperledger Fabric
Fiat money Fiat money is unredeemable money that
has no intrinsic value and which is made a
currency by a resolution (from Latin,"fiat"
m eaning "let it be done").
21
Fiat ramp A Fiat ramp is a > payment gateway that
permits the user to send > fiat money to an
account and use these funds to purchase
> cryptocurrencies.
fiftyone percent see > 51% attack
attack
financial inclusion Financial inclusion is the process of
making financial products and services -
transactions, payments, savings, credit,
investments and insurance - affordable to
disadvantaged and low-income segments of
society in a fair and transparent fashion.
The objective of financial inclusion is to
decrease those segments of society which
are > underbanked or even entirely >
unbanked.
Finney Finney is a denomination of > Ether and a
popular measurement unit of > Gas. 1
E ther = 1'000'000'000'000'000 Finney
first-mover A first-mover advantage is the advantage a
advantage (FMA) business gains by being the first significant
player to enter a new market or market
segment, leading to higher revenues and
p rofits over time.
22
Flappening The Flappening is the name of a potential
future event when Litecoin reclaims its
leadership of > Bitcoin Cash in terms of
> market capitalization.
Flippening The Flippening is the name of a potential
future event when > Bitcoin is overtaken
by another > cryptocurrency in terms of
> market capitalization.
FOMO FOMO is an acronym for "Fear Of Missing
Out" and describes the anxiety that a value
creating event may currently be happening
and that one misses out on it; it regularly
describes the buying behaviour when
cryptocurrencies are suddenly gaining in
value and more buyers appear to enter the
m arket all of a sudden.
foreign exchange Foreign exchange is the process by which
one national currency (> Fiat money) is
e xchanged for another national currency.
Forex (foreign Forex is the market where > foreign
exchange market, exchange takes place.
FX, currency
m arket)
23
fork A fork is a split in a > blockchain resulting
in two individual blockchains; forks can be
caused by > 51% attack, errors in the
program code, or a new set of rules for the
> consensus process.
forking Forking is the process of creating two
alternative pieces of code, resulting in a
> fork.
FPGA A FPGA is an integrated circuit that can be
(Field configured after manufacturing, allowing it
Programmable to be adapted to a variety of tasks; FPGAs
Gate Array) were used in > cryptocurrency > mining in
the early 2010s, before the more price-
competitive > ASICS came to the market;
compared to CPUs, FPGAs offer higher
> hashrates at a fraction of the electricity
expenditure. FPGAs offer greater
flexibility than > ASICS, as they can be
r econfigured to mine for any > coin.
fraud see > scam
Frontier, Frontier, Homestead, Metropolis, Serenity
Homestead, are the names of the four planned stages of
Metropolis, the > Ethereum development roadmap.
S erenity
24
FUD FUD is an acronym for Fear, Uncertainty,
and Doubt, describing the negative
sentiment oftentimes intentionally induced
by someone or of a group of individuals
who want the price of coin or token to
d rop.
FUDster A FUDster is an individual who spreads >
F UD.
full node A full node is a component of a network
built on > DLT that fully validates every
transaction and > block presented to it
through the network by verifying them
against the network’s
> consensus mechanisms.
fungible fungible is a quality of an asset denoting
that the asset can be exchanged for another
asset of a similar or identical type without
any significant loss occurring to the holder;
to be fungible > tokens must not bear any
u nique information.
Gas Gas is a measurement of how much
processing is required by the > Ethereum
network to process a transaction;
transactions with higher Gas prices are
p rioritized by the network.
25
Gas limit The Gas limit is the maximum amount of
> Gas a user is willing to spend for a
particular transaction on the > Ethereum
n etwork.
Gas price Gas price is the price of a Gas unit
d enominated in > Ether .
general ledger see > central ledger
genesis block The genesis block is the very first > block
o f any > blockchain.
Git Git is an > open source version control
system that was developed by Linus
Torvalds; it chronologically records
changes to a file or set of files so that
developers can recall any earlier versions
o f the code at a later point in time.
Git commit see > commit
26
Github GitHub is an online hosting service for
version control using > Git; GitHub is
Web-based and offers distributed version
control and source code management
f unctionality.
Gwei Gwei is a denomination of > Ether and a
popular measurement unit of > Gas.
1 Ether = 1000000000 Gwei.
halving Halving is the process of reducing the
rewards per mined block in order to
maintain the total supply of a coin or token;
it was first applied to > Bitcoin where the
reward is halved after the first 210,000 >
blocks are mined and then every 210,000
t hereafter.
hard cap The hard cap is the maximum number of
coins that will ever be created (e.g. 21mn.
for Bitcoin); not all cryptocurrencies have a
h ard cap ( e.g. > Ether ).
27
hard fork A hard fork is a specific form of a > fork
which occurs when the developers of a
> blockchain decide that changes must be
made to the code so that it will create
lasting incompatibilities between the older
and newer version; contrary to a > soft fork
a hard fork requires that all > nodes
upgrade to the new version of the code; as
all nodes will only recognize the new
blocks as valid, a softfork is backward-
c ompatible.
hardware wallet see > cold wallet
hash A hash is the result of executing a > hash
f unction.
hash code see > hash
hash function A hash function is a one-way > algorithm
used to map data of arbitrary size onto data
o f a fixed size.
hash value see > hash
28
hashed Hashed is an attribute of a data set which
has been transformed using a > hash
f unction.
Hashgraph Hashgraph is a > DLT and alternative to
> blockchain which achieves superior
performance by using a
> consensus mechanism based on a virtual
voting > algorithm combined with the
g ossip protocol.
hashing Hashing describes the process of executing
a > hash function.
hashrate The Hashrate denotes the speed at which
> hash functions are executed.
HFT (high HFT is a form of trading using
frequency trading) sophisticated systems to transact a large
n umber of orders at extremely high speeds.
HODL HODL is slang term used in the
cryptocurrency community for holding a
cryptocurrency rather than selling it; it can
also be interpreted as an acronym for "Hold
O n for Dear Life".
29
hot storage A hot storage is an electronic device that
stores > cryptocurrencies and which is
connected to the Internet; it is typically
easier to setup, access, scale than
> cold storage but more susceptible to
unauthorized access, hacking attacks, and
o ther vulnerabilities.
hot wallet A hot wallet is a > digital wallet employing
> hot storage technology
Hyperledger see > Hyperledger Fabric
Hyperledger Hyperledger Fabric is an > open source
Fabric modular platform based on > blockchain
technology designed for enterprise
c ontexts.
IaaS (ICO as a see > IEO
S ervice)
30
ICO Advisor An ICO Advisor is a person who advises a
project on the various facets of an > ICO,
such as legal, business modeling,
> tokenomics, technology, marketing and
i ndustry.
ICO Rating see > rating
IEO (initial An initial exchange offering (IEO) - or
exchange offering, ICO as a service (IaaS) - is a process in
ICO as a service) which > cryptocurrencies are sold via a
> crypto exchange: The exchange takes the
position of the issuing project in the
offering process and after the project has
provided the newly mined cryptocurrencies
to the exchange, the exchange collects
funds (e.g. > Ether , > Bitcoin,
> Fiat money etc.) from contributors and
allots the newly mined > coins or > tokens
t o the contributors.
immutability Immutability is a feature of data stored on
the > blockchain. Hence, the blockchain
contains a history of transactions which is
typically permanent, inerasable, and
unalterable history of transactions.
Immutability can be threatened by
extraordinary events, such as
> 51% attacks.
31
Incubator An incubator is an organization that
accelerates the development of new and >
startup companies by providing
entrepreneurs with an array of targeted
resources and services such as office
infrastructure and management training.
Through their network of contacts
incubators often provide new paths to
funding from > Angel Investors,
> venture capital firms and other investors.
The services provided by incubators are
usually developed and orchestrated by the
i ncubator management.
initial coin offering An initial coin offering is an unregulated
(ICO) means of > crowdfunding applied by
> cryptocurrency businesses as an
alternative to the rigorous and regulated
capital-raising process required by venture
capitalists, banks, or stock exchanges. In an
ICO a percentage of the newly issued
> cryptocurrency is sold to investors in
exchange for legal tender or other
c ryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin.
Initial Token An Initial Token Offering is largely
Offering (ITO) identical to an > Initial Coin Offering, yet
it typically pertains to projects built on the
> Ethereum > blockchain.
32
IPO (initial public An initial public offering is the process by
offering) which a private company is offered for the
first time to the general public on a
securities exchange. IPOs are typically
conducted by small and young firms
seeking capital to expand, but they can also
be done by large privately-owned
companies looking to become publicly
t raded.
know your KYC is a set of principles for identifying
customer (KYC) and verifying the identity of banking
clients to adhere to anti-money laundering
regulations, but also to ensures that the
bank has detailed information on the
clients' risk tolerance, investment
k nowledge and financial standing.
lambo lambo is an abbreviation for Lamborghini;
owning one appears to be the objective of
many participants in the crypto
> ecosystem.
ledger A ledger is record-keeping system for
recording and totaling economic
transactions; in banking the ledger was the
principle book or "bank book", containing
all debit and credit account records of the
b ank.
33
Ledger Nano Ledger Nano is a popular USB
> cold wallet to store > cryptocurrencies.
Lightning Network The Lightning Network is a payment
protocol that was created on top of
> blockchain-based > cryptocurrencies
such as example > Bitcoin. It reduces the
number of interactions on the blockchain
and thus enables faster transactions and
t hus higher levels of scalability.
Lightweight Node A Lightweight Node is a component of a
network built on > DLT that performs
basic and limited functions contributing to
authenticating and validating the
t ransactions on the network.
Litecoin Litecoin is a > blockchain based
> cryptocurrency following the > P2P
principle and resulting from an open-
source software project that was published
on Gibthub in 2011. The intervals between
> mining > blocks is shorter than with
> Bitcoin and due to the usage of different
> algorithms > FPGA and > ASIC devices
are harder to deploy for Litecoin mining
t han for Bitcoin mining.
34
majority attack see > 51% attack
maker fee Maker fees are charges due when a market
participant places a limit buy order below
market price or a limit sell order above
market price; as this action adds liquidity
to the market, the maker fee is on crypto
currency exchanges oftentimes lower than
the opposite, the > taker fee.
market Market capitalization traditionally refers to
capitalization the total market value of a company's
(market cap.) outstanding shares; in the context of
cryptocurrencies it denotes the total value
of a project's > tokens or > coins in
c irculation.
Master Node A master nodes is a > full node in a
network built on > DLT which keeps the
complete copy of the > distributed ledger
in real-time and is online 24/7; master
nodes may also support the network by
governing voting events, executing
protocol operations, enforcing the laws of
t he corresponding network etc.
math based see > cryptocurrency
c urrency
35
maximum supply see > hard cap
Meta Mask MetaMask is a browser extension for
accessing > dapps; as such it can also
s erve as a > digital wallet.
MEW (My Ether MEW is a free, > open source
Wallet) > software wallet for usage in the
> Ethereum network.
Miner A miner is a person that engages in >
m ining.
Minimum viable A minimum viable product is an early
product (MVP) version of a product with just sufficient
features to satisfy early adopters, and to
collect feedback for future product
d evelopment.
Mining (to mine) Mining describes the process of creating
new block on a > DLT system such as the
> blockchain by validating transactions
and demonstrating > PoW and as a result
being rewarded with newly created > coins
> tokens as a result.
mining rig A mining rig is a computer system
especially designed for carrying out >
mining tasks and is thus typically using >
A SIC technology.
36
mobile payment A mobile payment is a > digital payment
via a mobile device so that the transaction
can be conducted independently of the
geographic location of the person
c onducting the transaction.
mobile wallet see > digital wallet
money laundering Money laundering is the process of
transforming monetary proceeds of crimes
i nto apparently "legitimate" assets.
mooning Mooning is the process of a > token or
> coin undergoing an extreme price hike,
it's "going to the moon". The price goes up
to astronomical levels. It may be the first
p hase of a > pump and dump scheme.
mPOS Describes a mobile > POS. It is the place
where sales are made in case mobile
b usiness is conducted.
multichain A multichain is a platform that bridges
different > blockchain technologies. As
s uch it makes different > DLTs compatible.
37
multisig Multisig is a process that requires more
(multisignature) than one signature to approve a transaction
before it can be transmitted to the
> blockchain and thus increases security
f or > cryptocurrency transactions.
mWallet see > digital wallet
NFT (non-fungible An NFT is a > non-fungible > token, i.e. a
token) token that bears some unique information;
NFTs are therefore oftentimes considered
c ollectable tokens
node A node is device on a network that
represents a piece of a > DLT and carries
out certain tasks such as maintaining a
copy of a > ledger or parts thereof,
p rocessing transactions etc.
nonce A nonce is an arbitrary number or string
that can be used only once in a
c ryptographic communication.
38
non-fungible non-fungible is a quality of an asset
denoting that the asset cannot be
exchanged for another asset of a similar or
identical type without any significant loss
occurring to the holder; to be non-fungible
> tokens must bear some unique
i nformation.
off chain Off chain is a property of a transaction
denoting that it does not occurs on a
> distributed ledger such as the
> blockchain. An off chain transaction
does not have to validated it is typically
f aster than an > on chain transaction.
on chain On chain is a property of a transaction
denoting that it occurs on a
> distributed ledger such as the
> blockchain, and thus that it is reflected
there as soon as its state has been validated.
An on-chain transaction is therefore
regularly slower than an > off chain
t ransaction.
Onboarding (client Onboarding is the process of adding a new
onboarding) client to the existing group of clients or
members of an organization and
familiarizing the client or member with
services, products, and processes. In the
case of financial services, onboarding
regularly involves > AML as well as
> KYC procedures.
39
Online Wallet see > digital wallet
open API An open API is a publicly available > API
that provides third-party developers with
the necessary information to access a
proprietary system in order to build
applications communicating with this
s ystem.
open source Open source is a principle according to
which the source code of software is made
available to anyone and for any purpose,
such as inspection, modifying, and
d istribution by the copyright holder.
P2P (peer to peer) P2P is a quality of decentralised system
describing the fact that all participants
(peers) are equally privileged and
equipotent participants; in the context of
the > blockchain, P2P describes a network
of equally privileged and equally potent
> nodes.
paper wallet A paper wallet is a printout of the wallet
> address and > private key and thus a
s pecific form of > cold storage.
40
Parachain A parachain is a simpler form of
(parallelizable > blockchain, which builds on the security
chain) features provided by a > relay chain rather
than providing its own. One key feature of
a parachain is that the computations it
performs is inherently independent of the
r elay chain.
payment gateway A payment gateway is a merchant service
that authorizes payment processing (credit
card, debit card, Paypal,
> cryptocurrencies etc.) for retailers of any
kind, e.g. online businesses, physical
s tores, restaurants etc.
PayTech PayTech is a subset of > Fintech and a new
domain within the financial industry that
applies technology to improve payments. It
builds on technologies such as the
> digital wallet,> DLT and > NFC and
strives to advance > electronic payments
and/or > mobile payments, both at > POS
a nd > mPOS.
PIN A PIN is a numeric or alphanumeric
password or code used in many electronic
financial transactions for authenticating or
identifying a user to a system and/or a
s ystem to a user.
41
Pitch A pitch is a business plan delivered
verbally by an entrepreneur to potentials
i nvestors or other parties.
plasma Plasma is a combination of different
methods to make the > blockchain more
scalable.
platform see > crypto protocol
POC (proof of In project management a PoC is a
concept), also PoC significant accomplishment which
(proof of concept) demonstrates that the realization of a
c ertain method, concept or idea is feasible.
POP (proof of see > PoC (Proof of Concept)
p rinciple)
PoS (Proof of Proof-of-stake is a > consensus process
Stake) that requires network participants to ‘lock
up’, resp. 'stake', specific quantities of
> tokens used in the network for a short
amount of time in order to ‘vote’ and
generate network consensus; the participant
can > mine or validate > block transactions
corresponding to the quantity of > coins or
> tokens he or she holds: the more coins or
tokens are held by the miner, the more
m ining power he or she has.
42
PoW (proof of Proof of work is a > consensus process
work) that requires a datum that is very costly to
produce in terms of time and/or resources,
yet which can be very simply verified by
another party; PoW for > Bitcoin is
r eferred to as a > nonce.
pre-mined Pre-mined is an attribute describing the
process throughout which > coins or
> tokens are being put in circulation: if
pre-mined all tokens will be put in
c irculation upon > ICO.
pre-sale A pre-sale is a phase that can occur during
an > ICO and which is held in advance of
the regular sale; select investors can then
typically buy > coins or > tokens at a
s ignificant discount.
private key A private key is a confidentially kept string
of code that - when paired with a
> public key - sets off > decryption
> algorithms, for instance permitting users
t o access their > cryptocurrencies.
43
private sale Private sale is a sales process where tokens
or > cryptocurrencies are tendered to a
clearly defined group of investors, rather
t han being sold to the broader public.
proof of work see > PoW
Proof of address A proof of address serves as evidence for
the registered domicile of a user and is
typically obtained during a > KYC process
(e.g. a bank statement mentioning the
a ddress of a client, a utility bill etc.)
Proof of burn Proof of burn is a method used in the
context of > coin burn to proof that a
specific number of coins or tokens were
irrevocably burnt by sending them to an
address from which they cannot be
r etrieved.
Proof of identity A proof of identity serves as evidence for
the true identity of a user and is typically
obtained during a > KYC process (e.g. a
c opy of a passport, official ID etc.).
44
proof-of-keys The proof of keys is a movement, rallying
for investors to remove all their > coins
and > tokens from third-party
> crypto exchanges and other third-party
service providers on a specific date. The
event compels the service providers to
evidence that they hold the crypto funds
they claim to store for the client and that
they are thus in possession of the users’
> private keys.
protocol see > crypto protocol
PSD2 (Payment PSD2 is the second Payment Services
Services Directive Directive, set forth by the European Union
2) which aims at improving consumer
protection with regards to online payments,
promoting the development and use of
innovative online and > mobile payments,
and making European cross-border
p ayments more secure.
PSP (payment A PSP is a firm that offers other business
service provider) services for accepting
> electronic payments and thus establishes
a connection between shops and financial
institutions such as banks and credit card
firms, but also > cryptocurrency
> payment gateways.
45
public address A public address is a > hashed version of
t he > public key.
public key A public key is a publicly known string of
code that is related to a > private key and
used in algorithms to encrypt data, for
instance to send > cryptocurrencies to a
u ser’s > address.
pump and dump Pump and dump is a type of > scam in
(P&D) which the fraudster buys a > coin or
> token and then artificially inflates its
price using false and misleading positive
statements in order to sell it thereafter at a
h igher price.
pumping see > shilling
46
race attack A race attack is a specific type of a >
double-spending attack exploiting
information asymmetries: the attacker
(payer) supplies a payment transaction to
the victim (vendor) as well as to the
network. If the victim sees the unconfirmed
transaction first, before the network rejects
the transaction as a > double spending,
there is a large likelihood that the victim
w ill never get paid.
Raiden Network The Raiden Network is a complementary
extension to the > Ethereum network
intended to allow for near-instant, low-fee
and scalable transactions with any
> ERC20 compatible token.
rating A rating is a relative estimate or
evaluation; > ICO ratings are regularly
used to advertise the alleged quality of an
I COs.
reddit Reddit is a US-American social news
aggregation, web content > rating, and
discussion website; the user community
can submit as well as vote on content as
d iverse as links, text posts, images etc.
47
RegTech RegTech is a new domain within the
financial industry that applies technology
to improve regulatory processes, especially
w ith regards to > KYC and > AML.
regulatory A regulatory sandbox is a supervised
sandbox space, open to both authorized and
unauthorized firms, that provides a set of
rules that allows innovators to test their
products and services in a live environment
without following some or all legal
requirements, subject to predefined
r estrictions.
relay chain The relay chain is a > blockchain that
lends security to attached > parachains
and ensures secure message-passing
b etween them.
restricted Restricted countries is a list of countries in
countries which specific > coins and > tokens are
not offered for sale throughout an > ICO
p rocess.
48
ROI (Return on The ROI is a performance measure used to
Investment) evaluate the efficiency of an investment in
terms of the amount of return an
investment yields relative to the
investment’s costs; ROI = (Investment
Payoff - Investment Cost) / Investment
C ost.
SAFT (Simple The SAFT is an agreement conveying
Agreement for rights in > tokens prior to the development
Future Tokens) of the tokens’ functionality; it ensures the
delivery of > tokens to the investors once a
functioning application has been developed
f or that token.
Sandbox see > regulatory sandbox
Satoshi Nakamoto Satoshi Nakamoto is a pseudonym used by
(SATS) an individual or a group of individuals who
developed > Bitcoin, devised the Bitcoin >
white paper, and developed the first
> blockchain.
SATS see > Satoshi Nakamoto
49
scam (fraud) A scam is an intentional deception to
deprive another person of his or her right
and to secure an unlawful gain and thus a
dishonest scheme, resp. fraud; in the world
of > cryptocurrencies various types of
scam exist, varying from deceptive > ICOs
where the company has little more to offer
than a > white paper, to unjustified fees
and costs charged by unregulated
> crypto exchanges and malware using
devices to > mine > Bitcoin without the
u ser's consent.
secret key see > private key
security token A security token is an investment vehicle
which has the character of a security, i.e. it
is bought in anticipation of future profits in
form of dividends, revenue share, or price
a ppreciation.
Segregated SegWit is the label used for a > soft fork
Witness (Segwit) implemented on some > blockchain
protocols, such as > Bitcoin, which
changes the transaction format so that it
transfers parts of the transaction data out of
the main > block, thus reducing the
effective size of transaction and thus
allowing more transactions to fit into a
single block without increasing the > block
s ize.
50
sell wall A sell wall is an expression describing a
situation when the amount/size of sell
orders for a particular > coin or > token is
significantly larger than the number of sell
o rders.
shard see > sharding
sharding Sharding is a specifying type of database
partitioning: it divides large databases,
such as the > blockchain the into smaller,
faster, more easily manageable parts called
d atabase shards or shards.
Shilling Shilling is the process of someone heavily
(pumping) advertising a > cryptocurrency; it is the
f irst part of > pump and dump schemes.
Shitcoin A shitcoin is a > token or > coin which has
n o value or utility (any longer).
51
side chains A sidechain is a separate > blockchain that
is attached to its parent blockchain
( mainchain) using a two-way peg.
Signature A signature is the mathematical operation
for verifying the authenticity of a
transaction or a document and can for
instance be used to prove someone's
ownership over his/her > digital wallet,
> coins or data.
smart contract A smart contract is an online contractual
agreement based on the > Ethereum
> blockchain that runs exactly as
programmed without any possibility of
downtime, censorship, fraud or third-party
i nterference.
soft cap In the context of an > ICO or an > ITO, a
soft cap is the minimum amount of money
a project intends to raise. If this minimum
amount is reached, the ICO or ITO is
considered a success; although normally
the project is expected to return the funds if
the soft cap is not reached, there have been
cases of projects keeping the funds despite
the > ICO or > ITO not being successful
w hich may be considered a > scam.
52
soft fork A soft fork is a specific form of a > fork
which occurs when the developers of a
> blockchain decide that changes must be
made to the code so that previously valid
blocks are made invalid; contrary to a >
hard fork a soft fork requires that only a
majority of > nodes upgrade to the new
version of the code; as old nodes will
continue to recognize the new blocks as
v alid, a soft fork is backward-compatible.
software wallet A software wallet is a > digital wallet
existing as an application on a computer
and typically employs > hot storage
t echnology.
Solidity Solidity is an object-oriented programming
language that smart contracts can be
written in; it can be used on various > DLT
p latforms.
spoofing Spoofing is a form of market manipulation,
resp. > scam, in which a market participant
places a large buy or sell order with no
intention of executing it. By doing so he or
she creates an artificial impression of high
or low demand for a traded asset and thus
o ftentimes induces price changes.
53
spread A spread is the difference between the
highest bid and the lowest ask price of an
asset. Low spreads are a sign of a liquid
m arkets.
stable coin Stable coins are > coins that correlate
relatively little with overall cryptocurrency
markets. Oftentimes stablecoins are pegged
to single > fiat monies or to exchange
t raded commodities.
staking Staking is part of the > proof of stake
> consensus process which requires
network participants to ‘lock up’, specific
quantities of tokens used in the network for
a short amount of time in order to ‘vote’
and generate network consensus; typically
staking is rewarded depending on the size
o f the stake provided.
startup (start-up, . A startup is a business that is in the process
startup company) of being setup or one that has just recently
b egun operation.
54
state channels State channels are secure transactions
among > DLT users that occur off the
blockchain and thus minimize the use of
on-chain operations; they are used, for
instance, in the > Raiden Network or
> Lightning Network.
STO (security An STO is an event at which a
token offering) > security token is offered at a set price
before being offered on an exchange,
similarly to an > IPO in traditional finance;
discounts may apply at this time; STOs are
subject to country-specific regulations.
Szabo Szabo is a denomination of > Ether and a
popular measurement unit of > Gas. 1
E ther = 1000000000000 Szabo.
taker fee Taker fees are charges due when a market
participant places a market or limit order
that executes immediately against a limit
order already on the orderbook; as this
action removes liquidity from the market,
the taker fee is on
> cryptocurrency exchanges oftentimes
h igher than the opposite, the > maker fee.
55
Tangle Tangle is a > DLT that requires the user to
approve of two previous transactions if
he/she wants to carry out a new one; by
doing so the initiator of a new transaction
indirectly confirms that a subsection of the
Tangle is valid and that it conforms to the
protocol rules; it thus represents Tangle’s
> proof of work; Tangle therefore merges
the transaction making process with the
> consensus mechanism.
tap A tap is a poll among the investors in the >
DAICO process aimed at securing capital
for certain tasks in the course of the
p roject.
Telegram Telegram is a cloud-bases instant
messaging application, similar to
WhatsApp, Line and Facebook Messenger.
One of Telegram's defining features are its
"supergroups", that can group up to
100.000 users in a single group-chat. This
feature makes Telegram the platform of
choice for mass-communication. The
application has become very popular in the
crypto world, where it is routinely used by
companies, investors and other parties to
c ommunicate investing opportunities.
56
TFA see > 2FA
(two factor
a uthentication)
This is it, “This is it, gentlemen” is used in the crypto
gentlemen community to point out positive things that
a re currently happening.
timestamp A timestamp is a set of information
identifying the time at which an event is
recorded by a computer; on the
> blockchain timestamps show the
chronological order of the > blocks and
marks the exact time of each transaction;
timestamps prove what has happened when
on the blockchain.
timestamping Timestamping is the process of proving
that a certain event occurred priori to a
certain point in time; timestamping based
on > blockchain > timestamps is
particularly trustworthy, since timestamps
on the blockchain are subject to
> immutability.
57
Token Tokens are > cryptocurrencies that are
created and accounted for in > DLT
systems and represent an asset, a usage
right or a unit of value issued by a
organization and are typically emitted
throughout an > ICO, > ITOs, or
> private sale; oftentimes, > tokens do not
run on proprietary DLT systems, but use
other > cryptocurrencies' > blockchains,
m ost typically > Ethereum.
token basket A token basket is a composite collection of
(token set) > tokens that has been created using an
> Ethereum > smart contract; token
baskets allow for investing in a collection
of > digital assets rather than investing in
e ach of those assets individually.
token contract A token contract is a > smart contract on
t he > Ethereum network.
token contract A token contract address is the location of
address the actual > token contract that manages
t he logic for tokens.
token gravity Token gravity is a concept describing how
> tokens are expected to move within a
d igital ecosystem
58
token sales Token sales is the process of tendering
newly mined > tokens or > coins,
oftentimes in the context of an > ICO or
> STO.
token set see > token basket
tokenization Tokenization is a method of protecting
sensitive information by substituting a
critical data element with a non-sensitive
unique alphanumeric identifier, referred to
as a token, that has no exploitable meaning
or value to third parties. E.g. tokenization
can be used to create a representation of a
r eal-world asset by a digital token.
Tokenomics Tokenomics (umbrella term that
encompasses > token and economics) is
the economics underlying a token: it sets
forth when, which quantity of tokens are
issued and burned and for which purposes
they can be used and when; it thus
determines the framework for supply and
d emand.
total supply The total supply is the total amount of
> tokens or > coins in existence at the
present; it is equal to the total amount of
coins/tokens mined minus any that have
b een verifiably > burned.
59
TPS (transactions TPS is the rate at which a system can
per second) process transactions, i.e. at which rate
b locks can be created on the > blockchain.
trading bot A trading bot is an application that is
directly linked to > crypto exchanges
oftentimes via an > API and, programmed
to trade > crypto currencies following pre-
d efined > algorithms.
transaction fee A per transaction fee is an expense a user
must pay to an intermediary for conduction
a transaction on a specific system. On
> cryptocurrency exchanges fees are
typically calculated based on a percentage
of the notional order value for a matched
trade; the fees typically differ between
> maker fee and > taker fee.
transactions per see > TPS
s econd
Trezor Trezor is a popular USB > cold wallet to
s tore > cryptocurrencies.
60
Turing complete Turing complete is a term given to a
system that is able to recognize or decide
specific other data-manipulation rule sets
(the ones used by Turing Machines);
Turing complete is a label used to express
the power of such a data-manipulation rule
set; the large majority of modern
programming languages are Turing
c omplete.
unbanked Unbanked is a characteristic describing
people who do not use banks or financial
institutions oftentimes because they do not
have access to banking services or because
they prefer cash transactions outside the
b anking system.
underbanked Underbanked is a characteristic describing
people who do not have sufficient access to
mainstream financial services and products
typically offered by retail banks and thus
regularly rely on cash and checks as a
mean of funding rather than bank related
m ethods such as credit cards or loans.
61
utility token A utility token is > token issued in order to
fund the development of an IT systems
and/or business model and can typically be
used to later on purchase goods or services
created by the issuer of that token and can
t hus oftentimes be seen as usage rights.
vesting Vesting is a term characterising the fact
that an asset is wholly owned by an
investor; crypto projects oftentimes
implement long-lasting token release
vesting schedules for their token sale
investors, locking them into those tokens
f or a considerable period of time.
virtual currency see > digital currency
Vitalik Buterin Vitalik Buterin is a Russian-Canadian
developer best known as a co-founder of
> Ethereum.
wallet see > digital wallet
Wash Trade A wash trade is a trade on an exchange
used to manipulate the market: An investor
62
simultaneously sells and buys the identical
financial instruments in order to create
exaggerated and potentially misleading
activity in the marketplace. Wash trades
are often used by
> cryptocurrency exchanges to inflate
t rading volumes.
Weak Hands Weak hands is a term used to describe
investors selling their assets during a
negative market sentiment, similar to a
card players who folds their cards at the
first sign that they are going to lose;
t ypically weak hands will sell during lows.
Wei Wei is the smallest denomination of
> Ether and a measurement unit of > Gas.
1 Ether = 1'000'000'000'000'000'000 Wei
Whale Whale is a term used to describe
participants in the cryptocurrency market
that are large enough to influence it; in this
context the ocean serves as a metaphor for
the entire market as it is home to large and
small fish and waves can be understood as
m arket movements.
White Paper A white paper is an in-depth report that
aims to educate the reader on a particular
issue, or explain a particular methodology
63
or solution; in the crypto-world white paper
often refers to the document issued by
companies priori to their > ICO or > STO
informing the reader of the purpose of the
> ICO or > STO and the technology
behind it, in which case the white paper
could be argued to be a tool to help the
c ompany sell the > cryptocurrencies.
whitelisting Whitelisting is the process of explicitly
allowing specific identified investors to
p articipate in a token sale.
This page intentionally left blank
POSTFACE
This book is far from being complete. As an emerging field the topic
of cryptocurrencies, tokens and digitalassests is constantly evolving.
Hence, should you be missing one particular term or expression which
you believe ought to be included in this booklet, do send us an e-mail:
patrick.schueffel@hefr.ch
We look forward to hearing from you!
Patrick Schueffel
Nikolaj Groeneweg
Rico Baldegger
About the authors
Patrick Schueffel is professor at the School of Management
Fribourg, Switzerland, and the institution's Liaison Officer in
Singapore. His research focus is on Banking, Finance and
Entrepreneurship. After a long-time banking career in Zurich,
he is now also active as a founder, investor and advisor in the
Singaporean and Swiss Crypto scene alike and
enthusiastically connecting the dots between Europe and Asia.
Nikolaj Groeneweg is an entrepreneur and A.I. engineer with
a decade of experience on the intersection of business and
technology - growing startups and helping corporates bring to
market new initiatives. He is currently based in Singapore,
where he is a founder in the Crypto scene and an advisor to
companies looking to do business in Asia Pacific.
Rico Baldegger is the Rector of the School of Management
Fribourg, Switzerland, and teaches and researches at this
institution as a professor. His research focus is on Business
Administration, Innovation, Entrepreneurial Economics and
International Economics. As a serial entrepreneur he has
helped creating numerous companies active in Switzerland
and abroad.
Have yoWu heavte r iws onthdeer ebdl owchkact hbaainnk?in gW ash aa tp laitsf oram dmiestarnibs,u wtehda t BaaS,
ICO andle MdgVePr s?t aWndh faotr d, aon pd ewohpalte am Ceoalonr ewd hCeonin t ihse? y talk about
ERC-20? What is the difference between a hard and
soft fork? And between hot and cold storage?
Then this booklet is the right guide for you: It explains more than 130
Fintech terms, acronyms, and abbreviations in plain English.
Containing over 300 entries on all aspects of crypto,
tokens and digital assets, this encyclopedia
incorporates the latest information available from
academia and practice on these topics. Loaded with
clear, concise, and authoritative information, it is the
most comprehensive single-volume A-Z reference
work of its kind.
Our aim in preparing this dictionary is to share the
vocabulary of a newly emerging field of business
and research endeavour. We are convinced that this
will make a major contribution to our mutual
understanding. It thus is essential for all
practitioners, students and educators in the field of
crypto who want to ensure that we use a common
language throughout the ecosystem.

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/Cryptocurrencies-and-blockchain-done.pdf
Europe and Central Asia Economic Update
Office of the Chief Economist
May 2018
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
WORLD BANK ECA ECONOMIC UPDATE MAY 2018
Cryptocurrencies
and Blockchain
Office of the Chief Economist
© 2018 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org
Some rights reserved
1 2 3 4 21 20 19 18
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World
Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges and
immunities of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.
Rights and Permissions
This work is available under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 IGO license (CC BY 3.0 IGO)
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/igo. Under the Creative Commons Attribution license,
you are free to copy, distribute, transmit, and adapt this work, including for commercial purposes,
under the following conditions:
Attribution—Please cite the work as follows: World Bank. 2018. “Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain.”
Europe and Central Asia Economic Update (May), Washington, DC: World Bank. Doi: 10.1596/978-1-
4648-1299-6. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO
Translations—If you create a translation of this work, please add the following disclaimer along with the
attribution: This translation was not created by The World Bank and should not be considered an official
World Bank translation. The World Bank shall not be liable for any content or error in this translation.
Adaptations—If you create an adaptation of this work, please add the following disclaimer along
with the attribution: This is an adaptation of an original work by The World Bank. Views and opinions
expressed in the adaptation are the sole responsibility of the author or authors of the adaptation and are
not endorsed by The World Bank.
Third-party content—The World Bank does not necessarily own each component of the content
contained within the work. The World Bank therefore does not warrant that the use of any third-party-
owned individual component or part contained in the work will not infringe on the rights of those third
parties. The risk of claims resulting from such infringement rests solely with you. If you wish to re-use
a component of the work, it is your responsibility to determine whether permission is needed for that
re-use and to obtain permission from the copyright owner. Examples of components can include, but
are not limited to, tables, figures, or images.
All queries on rights and licenses should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World Bank
Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
ISBN (electronic): 978-1-4648-1299-6
DOI: 10.1596/978-1-4648-1299-6
Cover design: World Bank
Contents
Acknowledgments ............................................................... v
Abbreviations ................................................................... vii
Regional Classification Used in this Report ............................................ ix
Executive Summary ............................................................... xi
PART I: Economic Outlook .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1 Economic Developments and Prospects .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Overview .................................................................... 3
Growth is strong throughout the region ............................................ 4
Growth appears to have peaked ................................................. 7
The region has shifted toward more exports ........................................ 11
. . . and adapted to technological change .......................................... 12
A combination of factors caused the decline in labor productivity after the crisis ........... 12
Notes ....................................................................... 19
References ................................................................... 19
2 Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational
Technologies?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Overview .................................................................... 21
Introduction .................................................................. 22
Creating digital money without central banks ....................................... 24
Creating digital markets without intermediaries ...................................... 32
Blockchain applications in Europe and Central Asia .................................. 37
Policy challenges .............................................................. 45
Notes ....................................................................... 48
References ................................................................... 49
Part II: Selected Country Pages .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Albania ...................................................................... 53
Armenia ..................................................................... 55
Azerbaijan ................................................................... 57
Belarus ...................................................................... 59
Bosnia and Herzegovina ........................................................ 61
Bulgaria ..................................................................... 63
Croatia ...................................................................... 65
Georgia ..................................................................... 67
Kazakhstan ................................................................... 69
Kosovo ...................................................................... 71
Kyrgyz Republic ............................................................... 73
Macedonia ................................................................... 75
Moldova ..................................................................... 77
Montenegro .................................................................. 79
Poland ...................................................................... 81
iii
iv ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
Romania ..................................................................... 83
Russian Federation ............................................................ 85
Serbia ....................................................................... 87
Tajikistan .................................................................... 89
Turkey ...................................................................... 91
Turkmenistan ................................................................. 93
Ukraine ...................................................................... 95
Uzbekistan ................................................................... 97
Boxes
1.1 Similarities between recoveries in Central Europe after 2009 and
East Asia in the late 1990s ................................................. 13
1.2 A new normal in Armenia ................................................. 17
2.1 Equilibrium mechanisms in the bitcoin market ................................. 28
2.2 Providing access to secure insurance ......................................... 34
2.3 Cryptocurrency mining and the demand for electricity in Georgia .................. 43
2.4 Will central banks issue digital currencies? .................................... 47
Figures
1.1 Industrial production growth has soared since 2016, globally and in Europe
and Central Asia ......................................................... 5
1.2 Commodity prices have followed the economic upswing ......................... 6
1.3 Acceleration of growth has resulted in lower unemployment ...................... 7
1.4 Normalization of inflation in Europe and Central Asia continues ................... 8
1.5 Housing prices in the European Union have risen since 2013 ...................... 9
1.6 The Purchasing Managers’ Index reached an all-time high in Europe and
Central Asia in 2018 ...................................................... 10
1.7 Government deficits in the region have fallen sharply since 2009 .................. 11
1.8 Since the crisis, production in Europe and Central Asia has shifted toward exports ..... 12
B1.1.1 Recovery in Central Europe was similar to recovery after Asian financial crisis ......... 13
B1.1.2 Investment rates adjusted immediately to reversal in capital flows .................. 13
1.9 Even after full recovery, the effects of the global financial crisis remain .............. 14
1.10 After the crisis, labor productivity increased at a slower rate ...................... 15
1.11 The contribution of total factor productivity (TFP) to labor productivity growth
declined after the crisis ................................................... 15
1.12 Labor productivity growth in Germany is on a long-term downward trend. . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1 As the price of bitcoin soared in 2017, so did competition among miners ............ 26
2.2 Three large mining pools provide half of all network blocks ....................... 27
2.3 Most mining revenue comes from the seignorage (block reward) of the network ...... 29
2.4 Daily price movements of bitcoin continue to be large ........................... 31
B2.2.1 Farmers in Europe and Central Asia are underinsured ........................... 34
2.5 Early use of bitcoin was clustered around gambling and the dark web .............. 38
2.6 Adoption of bitcoin is negatively correlated with the quality of institutions ........... 39
2.7 Europe and Central Asia is the site of many initial coin offerings (ICOs) .............. 41
B2.3.1 Georgia had the fastest-growing electricity consumption in Europe and
Central Asia in 2010–14 ................................................... 43
B2.3.2 Unexplained electricity demand in Georgia has risen rapidly since 2009 ............. 44
Tables
E.1 Regional classification used in this report ..................................... ix
1.1 Growth has reached an all-time high in most countries in Europe and Central Asia ..... 4
Acknowledgments
This Europe and Central Asia (ECA) Economic Update is a joint product of ECA’s
Office of the Chief Economist, the Macro and Fiscal Management Global Practice,
and the Poverty Global Practice.
Part I was prepared by a team in the Chief Economist’s Office led by Hans
Timmer and including Roy Sudharshan Canagarajah, Breda Griffith, Bingjie Hu,
Georgi Panterov, Charalampos Papamanthou, William Shaw, and Ekaterina
Ushakova. Chapter I benefitted from forecasts (presented in Part II) prepared by
economists in the Macro and Fiscal Management Global Practice. David Michael
Gould, Erik Feyen, Vincent Launay, Christopher David Miller, Stela Mocan,
Anthony Molle, and Young Chul Kim provided valuable comments on Part I.
Part II was prepared by teams from the Macro and Fiscal Management Global
Practice (led by Andrew Burns, Maria De los Angeles Cuqui Gonzalez Miranda,
Lalita M. Moorty, and Gallina Andronova Vincelette) and the Poverty Global
Practice (led by Luis-Felipe Lopez-Calva), with inputs from the Developments
Prospects Group (led by Ayhan Kose). These teams included the following staff:
Erdem Atas, Joao Pedro Wagner De Azevedo, Sarah Nankya Babirye, Elena
Bondarenko, Cesar Cancho, Marie-Anne Chambonnier, Alexandru Cojocaru,
Marcel Chistruga, Pablo Facundo Cuevas, Maria Eugenia Davalos, Agim
Demukaj, Mariam Dolidze, Donato De Rosa, Bakyt Dubashov, Olga Emelyanova,
Josip Funda, Mismake D. Galatis, Anastasia Golovach, Claudia Gutierrez, Gohar
Gyulumyan, Kiryl Haiduk, Sandra Hlivnjak, Stella Ilieva, Maria Gabriela
Inchauste Comboni, Saida Ismailakhunova, Charl Jooste, Jonathan George
Karver, Yeon Soo Kim, Aurelien Kruse, Sanja Madzarevic-Sujster, Mikhail
Matytsin, Kristina Cathrine Mercado, Moritz Meyer, Jose Montes, Evgenij Najdov,
Metin Nebiler, Minh Cong Nguyen, Trang Van Nguyen, Catalin Pauna, Habib
Nasser Rab, Alisher Rajabov, Nadir Ramazanov, Julio Revilla, Monica Robayo,
Paul Andres Corral Rodas, Armineh Manookian Salmasi, Apurva Sanghi, Ilyas
Sarsenov, William Hutchins Seitz, Asli Senkal, Lazar Sestovic, Hilda Shijaku,
Bojan Shimbov, Emilia Skrok, Karlis Smits, Sangjin Song, David Andrew Stephan,
Thi Thanh Thanh Bui, Eskender Trushin, Vincent Belinga De Paul Tsoungui,
Christoph Ungerer, Ekaterina Vostroknutova, Pinar Yasar and Bakhrom Ziyaev.
Ekaterina Ushakova oversaw the layout and production of the report. Barbara
Karni edited and Michael Alwan typeset it. Paul Anthony Clare, Tamar Kobakhidze,
Artem Kolesnikov, and Inga Paichadze provided communications and outreach
support, including the dedicated webpage (http://www.worldbank.org/en/
region/eca/publication/europe-and-central-asia-economic-update).
v
Abbreviations
ACP Attraction Centers Program
BoA Bank of Albania
BiH Bosnia and Herzegovina
CAD Current account deficit
CBA Central Bank of Armenia
CBR Central Bank of Russia
CBU Central Bank of Uzbekistan
CNB Croatian National Bank
CPI Consumer price index
CROSTAT Croatian Bureau of Statistics
DLT Distributed Ledger Technology
ECA Europe and Central Asia
ECAPOV ECAPOV (ECA Poverty) database of standardized household surveys
EEU Euroasian Economic Union
EFSD Eurasian Fund for Stabilization and Development
EU-SILC European Union Statistics on Income and Living Conditions
FDI Foreign direct investment
FX Foreign exchange
FYR Fiscal year
GDP Gross domestic product
GoA Government of Azerbaijan
HPP Hydro-power plant
IBA International Bank of Azerbaijan
ICO Initial coin offerings
ICT Information and communication technology
IFI International financial institution
IMF International Monetary Fund
IPO Initial public offering
IT Information technology
LCU Local currency unit
MSII Minimum Social Inclusion Income
NBG National Bank of Georgia
NBKR National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic
NBM National Bank of Moldova
NBP National Bank of Poland
vii
viii ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
NBR National Bank of Romania
NBU National Bank of Ukraine
NPL Non-performing loans
OPEC Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
PPA Power Purchasing Agreements
PPP Purchasing power parity
SAR Special administrative region
SDR Special Drawing Rights
SME Small and medium enterprise
SOE State-owned enterprises
SWIFT Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications
TFP Total factor productivity
TSA Targeted Social Assistance
UFRD Uzbekistan Fund for Reconstruction and Development
WB World Bank
WDI World Development Institute
Country Codes
Albania ALB Hungary HUN Philippines PHL
Argentina ARG India IND Poland POL
Armenia ARM Indonesia IDN Portugal PRT
Australia AUS Iran, Islamic Rep. IRN Romania ROM
Austria AUT Ireland IRL Russian Federation RUS
Azerbaijan AZE Italy ITA Saudi Arabia SAU
Belarus BLR Japan JPN Serbia SRB
Belgium BEL Kenya KEN
Singapore SGP
Bosnia and Herzegovina BIH Kazakhstan KAZ
Slovak Republic SVK
Brazil BRA Kosovo XKX
Slovenia SVN
Bulgaria BRG Kyrgyz Republic KGZ
South Africa ZAF
Canada CAN Latvia LVA
Spain ESP
Chile CHL Lithuania LTU
Sweden SWE
China CHN Luxembourg LUX
Switzerland CHE
Colombia COL FYR Macedonia MKD
Tanzania TZA
Croatia HRV Malaysia MYS
Tajikistan TJK
Czech Republic CZE Malta MLT
Thailand THA
Cyprus CYP Mexico MEX
Turkey TUR
Denmark DNK Moldova MDA
Turkmenistan TKM
Dominican Republic DOM Morocco MAR
Estonia EST Montenegro MNE Ukraine UKR
Finland FIN New Zealand NZL United Arab Emirates ARE
France FRA Nigeria NGA United Kingdom GBR
Georgia GEO The Netherlands NLD United States USA
Germany DEU Norway NOR Uzbekistan UZB
Greece GRC Pakistan PAK Venezuela, RB VEN
Hong Kong SAR, China HKG Peru PER Vietnam VNM
Regional Classification
Used in this Report
This report covers 47 countries referred to as Europe and Central Asia (ECA) coun-
tries. These are divided into 10 groups: Western Europe, Southern Europe, Central
Europe, Northern Europe, Western Balkans, South Caucasus, Central Asia, Russia,
Turkey, and Other Eastern Europe.
TABLE E .1 Regional classification used in this report
European Union
Western Southern Central Northern Western
Europe Europe Europe Europe Balkans
European Austria Greece Bulgaria Denmark Albania
Union Belgium Italy Croatia Finland Bosnia and Herzegovina
and France Portugal Czech Republic Sweden Kosovo
Western
Germany Spain Hungary Estonia FYR Macedonia
Balkans
Ireland Cyprus Poland Latvia Montenegro
Europe
Luxemburg Malta Romania Lithuania Serbia
and
The Netherlands Slovak Republic
Central
United Kingdom Slovenia
Asia
South Central Russian Other Eastern
Caucasus Asia Federation Turkey Europe
Eastern
Europe Armenia Kazakhstan Belarus
and Azerbaijan Kyrgyz Republic Moldova
Central Georgia Tajikistan Ukraine
Asia Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
ix
Executive Summary
With growth in Europe and Central Asia having peaked at 2.7 percent in 2017, policy mak-
ers face new challenges. How can they navigate the expected cyclical downturn? How can
they boost underlying potential growth that has slowed, especially since the global finan-
cial crisis? How should they adjust regulations and reform policies to benefit from the digi-
tal revolution while mitigating the transition costs? This report summarizes the economic
outlook for the region and examines the adoption of new blockchain technologies. In doing
so, it touches on all three challenges.
The 2017 rates of growth of GDP (2.7 percent) and private consumption (2.5 percent)
were faster than at any time since the global financial crisis of a decade ago. Growth was
especially strong in Central Europe and in Turkey, but it was robust in other parts of the
region as well. Unemployment rates are now close to their 2007 levels in most countries,
and average inflation exceeds 2 percent, indicating that little spare capacity is left.
Deceleration of growth is expected to be modest, but a sharper correction remains pos-
sible. Cyclical forces can easily reinforce one another, and additional shocks—rising pro-
tectionism, geopolitical tensions, larger than expected disruptions caused by Brexit—could
materialize. There is little room for further monetary stimulus if the expected slowdown is
sharper than expected. The region has rebuilt some fiscal buffers, however. The average
fiscal deficit in 2017 is estimated at just above 1 percent of GDP, down from 6 percent dur-
ing the 2009 crisis and close to levels at the end of the boom that preceded that crisis. Fiscal
stimulus is thus an option in several countries in case of a sharper than expected slow-
down. Under the baseline scenario of only a modest deceleration, however, a further
buildup of fiscal buffers seems the best strategy.
Many countries in the region have proven to be fertile ground for the development of
cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies. The emergence of these technologies is part
of a broader wave of technologies that facilitate peer-to-peer (P2P) commerce, the indi-
vidualization of products, and the flexibilization of production methods.
For a variety of reasons, these trends gained traction after the global financial crisis a
decade ago. Blockchain technologies aim to organize P2P transactions and P2P informa-
tion flows without intermediaries and central banks have opportunities to use blockchain
technologies to improve their services.
It is unclear how these technologies will develop in the long run; their ultimate impact
may be very different from the current applications. In response, policy makers should
strike a balance between curbing the hype surrounding these new technologies and un-
leashing potentially transformational new opportunities. While encouraging and facilitat-
ing these innovations, they should prepare to craft new regulations to create a level playing
field for new and old industries, by adjusting financial oversight, consumer protection,
and tax administration. They should also address the massive volume of electricity used
to mine cryptocurrencies.
xi
I
PART
Economic Outlook
1
Economic Developments
and Prospects
Overview
Growth is strong in Europe and Central Asia (ECA), stronger than at any time
since the global financial crisis of a decade ago. GDP rose 2.7 percent, and annual
private consumption rose 2.5 percent. Growth was especially strong in Central
Europe and Turkey, but it was robust in other parts of the region as well.
Growth has likely peaked, however. Increased capacity utilization, unemploy-
ment rates close to their 2007 levels, and average inflation now exceeding 2 per-
cent are all signals that growth is likely to decelerate.
The peaking of growth raises several questions
• How well is the region prepared for a sharper than expected cyclical down-
turn? As fiscal deficits have fallen to an average 1.5 percent of GDP, fiscal
policy could be used. But in most countries, monetary tightening would prob-
ably be more appropriate.
• Why is the underlying structural growth so low? Growth in 2017 was 0.4 per-
centage points below the average growth rate between 2000 and 2007. The
decelerating growth trend is associated with the shift toward services, the de-
cline in capital deepening, and a slower pace of measured total factor produc-
tivity (TFP).
• Has the economic upswing been used to adjust to the new normal of digital
technologies, more flexible employment contracts, and increased tradability
of goods and services? An unfinished agenda remains in terms of rethinking
social protection and facilitating private sector development in new, interna-
tionally competitive sectors. It is important that adjustments toward this new
reality continue, even if the expected slowdown materializes or deepens.
33
4 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
Growth is strong throughout the region
GDP growth of 2.7 percent in 2017 translated into a robust 2.5 percent increase in
per capita GDP, as the population is growing at a mere 0.2 percent a year. This
rate of growth was the fastest since 2007 and 0.9 percentage points faster than in
2016 (table 1.1). Growth exceeded 4 percent in 20 of the 47 countries in the region.
Ireland and Malta enjoyed growth of more than 5 percent. Romania and Slovenia
in Central Europe; Armenia and Georgia in the South Caucasus; and Turkey, Ta-
jikistan, and Uzbekistan in Central Asia also reported strong growth. Azerbaijan,
Belarus, and the Russian Federation emerged from recession (although their
growth was only moderate). Not a single country in the region experienced a
contraction in 2017.
Private sector demand drove this vigorous performance. Government con-
sumption increased by less than 1 percent on average in the region. Private in-
vestment rose by more than 4 percent, and growth in investment outpaced GDP
growth for the fourth year in a row. The volume of exports and imports expanded
by more than 5 percent in 2017, roughly twice as fast as GDP growth.1
The acceleration of growth has been a global phenomenon. Since the summer
of 2016, growth of global industrial production has more than doubled, ap-
proaching 5 percent in recent months, very close to the 4.8 percent global growth
during the 2003–07 boom.
TABLE 1.1 Growth has reached an all-time high in most countries in Europe and Central Asia
Change in forecast
since October 2017
Annual GDP growth (percent) (percentage points)
2017 2018 2019 2017 2018
Region/subregion 2015 2016 (estimate) (forecast) (forecast) 2016 (estimate) (forecast)
Europe and Central Asia 1.9 1.8 2.7 2.3 2.1 0.0 0.5 0.4
European Union and Western Balkans 2.2 1.9 2.5 2.2 1.9 0.0 0.4 0.4
European Union 2.2 1.9 2.5 2.2 1.9 0.0 0.4 0.4
Western Europe 2.2 1.8 2.3 2.1 1.7 0.0 0.4 0.4
Northern Europe 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.3 2.1 0.2 0.2 0.2
Central Europe 3.9 3.1 4.6 4.1 3.6 0.2 0.9 0.7
Southern Europe 1.6 1.7 2.2 1.9 1.6 0.0 0.3 0.3
Western Balkans 2.2 3.0 2.4 3.1 3.4 0.1 −0.3 −0.1
Eastern Europe and Central Asia 0.3 1.1 3.7 3.0 3.0 0.0 1.1 0.4
South Caucasus 1.7 −1.6 2.0 2.6 4.0 0.5 1.7 0.8
Central Asia 2.8 2.8 4.4 3.5 3.6 0.0 0.1 0.0
Russian Federation −2.5 −0.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 0.0 −0.2 0.0
Turkey 6.1 3.2 7.4 4.7 4.4 0.0 3.5 1.2
Other Eastern Europe −7.6 0.8 2.5 3.3 3.6 0.1 0.5 0.2
Source: World Bank.
Chapter 1: Economic Developments and Prospects ● 5
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
M03 M09 M03 M09 M03 M09 M03 M09 M03 M09 M03
201–31 2013 2014 2014 2015 2015 2016 2016 2017 2017 2018
–2
–3
The ECA region closely followed that acceleration (figure 1.1). The region as a
whole outperformed the United States in 2017, and growth of industrial produc-
tion in Central Europe and Turkey was on par with growth in China and India.
This performance lies in sharp contrast to performance in the aftermath of the
European banking and debt crisis, when the region’s performance significantly
lagged that of the world as a whole.
During this global acceleration, commodity prices rebounded. Copper prices,
which are closely linked to the industrial cycle, increased 43 percent between
October 2016 and March 2018, more than any other commodity. Oil prices in-
creased 30 percent over the same period (figure 1.2, panel a), providing some
relief for energy exporters and recipients of remittances in the eastern part of the
region. Consistent with their strong relationship with energy prices, grain prices
increased 18 percent between October 2016 and March 2018. Other agricultural
prices declined, leaving the index of agricultural prices flat.
The total nonoil commodity price index increased 10 percent over the last year
and a half, largely reflecting the weakening of the U.S. dollar over that period, as
all commodity prices are measured in dollars. The dollar depreciated 11 percent
against the euro and 6 percent against the Chinese renminbi over this period.
Average commodity prices expressed in these two currencies were thus relatively
stable. The dollar also depreciated against other currencies in the region. Between
October 2016 and March 2018, it fell 16 percent against the Czech koruna, 14
percent against the Albanian lek and the Polish zloty, 9 percent against the Rus-
sian ruble and the Hungarian forint, 7 percent against the Romanian leu, and 3
percent against the Kazakh tenge. Only a few regional currencies depreciated
during this period against the dollar. The Turkish lira depreciated 27 percent, and
the Azeri manat depreciated 5 percent. Metal and oil prices increased in all cur-
rencies, and many other commodity prices declined in euros or other currencies
in the region.
Despite their cyclical upturn, oil prices are nowhere near their historical highs.
Indeed, adjusted for inflation, global oil prices are 57 percent below their peak of
egareva
shtnom
3
htworg
egatnecreP
oga
raey
a
doirep
emas
revo
FIGURE 1.1 Industrial
production growth has
soared since 2016,
globally and in Europe
and Central Asia
World Europe and Central Asia
Source: World Bank.
6 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
FIGURE 1.2 Commodity
prices have followed a. Commodity prices have risen since late 2016. . .
the economic upswing 300
250
200
150
100
50
0
M01 M07 M01 M07 M01 M07 M01 M07 M01 M07 M01 M07 M01
2000 2001 2003 2004 2006 2007 2009 2010 2012 2013 2015 2016 2018
Oil Copper
b. . . . but they are nowhere near their historical peaks
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1960M01 1965M04 1970M07 1975M10 1981M01 1986M04 1991M07 1996M10 2002M01 2007M04 2012M07 2017M10
Oil Copper
July 2008 and 43 percent below the average level between early 2011 and late 2014
(figure 1.2, panel b).2 There are no signs that oil markets will return to those re-
cord prices. Consequently, adjustments in countries that directly or indirectly
depend on oil exports should continue.
Several of these countries have become more competitive in international
markets and begun diversifying their economies, partly as a result of the depre-
ciation of real exchange rates since the fall in oil prices late 2014. Unexploited
opportunities remain to shift farther away from nontradable production. Domes-
tic reforms that correct price distortions, eliminate privileges for state-sponsored
companies, and unleash more competition and innovation remain essential. The
recent wave of reforms in Uzbekistan sets a good example.3 They will likely lead
to further diversification and may trigger reforms in surrounding countries.
)tinu
rep
srallod(
ecirp
ytidommoC
)tinu
rep
srallod(
ecirp
ytidommoC
Source: World Bank.
Note: Panel a: Index of nominal prices in U.S. dollars; January 2015 = 100.
Panel b: Index of real prices (deflated with U.S. Consumer Price Index), January 2015 = 100.
Chapter 1: Economic Developments and Prospects ● 7
Growth appears to have peaked
Signals are mounting that global growth has peaked. With less spare capacity,
lower unemployment, rising inflation, and tightening monetary policy, the po-
tential for continued rapid growth has diminished, especially in the ECA region.
Unemployment is now close to where it was at the height of the boom a de-
cade ago (figure 1.3, panel a). The labor market has become tight, especially in
Northern Europe. The rapid decline in unemployment is remarkable, given the
history of hysteresis in the region’s labor markets. After every major crisis, the
typical pattern in Europe was for unemployment rates to settle at higher levels.
It is especially encouraging that youth unemployment in the European Union
has fallen sharply. It is now back to 2005 levels (figure 1.3, panel b), having fallen
FIGURE 1.3 Acceleration of
growth has resulted in
lower unemployment 12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
)tnecrep(
etar
tnemyolpmenU
10 25
8 20
6 15
4 10
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
)tnecrep(
etar
tnemyolpmenU
)tnecrep(
etar
tnemyolpmenU
a. Unemployment in Europe and Central Asia has almost returned to precrisis levels
b. Youth unemployment in the European Union closely tracks unemployment of older workers
Workers 25 and older (left-hand axis)
Workers under 25 (right-hand axis)
Sources: World Economic Outlook, April 2018 (panel a); Eurostat (panel b).
8 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
from 24.0 in 2013 percent to 16.8 percent in 2017 (the overall unemployment rate
fell from 9.5 percent to 6.7 percent over this period).4
Average inflation in the western part of the region has been almost 2 percent
since early 2017 (figure 1.4). That is a critical change from the deflationary threats
in the aftermath of the European banking crises. Between 2012 and 2016, the
consumer price index declined in at last one year in Armenia, Bosnia and Herze-
govina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Ireland, It-
aly, Lithuania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, the Slovak Republic,
Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. In several of these countries, the GDP deflator
still rose, and the drop in consumer prices reflected terms-of-trade gains. Never-
theless, the deflationary threat was a serious concern and the manifestation of
underutilized resources.
None of these countries experienced deflation in 2017. The average inflation
rate of 2 percent is close to the target of monetary authorities. As a result, the Euro-
pean Central Bank will likely discontinue quantitative easing in 2018; central banks
outside the euro area are also expected to tighten their policies. Tightening has
already started in Turkey, where inflation has reached double-digit levels.
Asset prices have risen even faster than consumer prices (figure 1.5). The in-
crease in real estate prices is not nearly as extreme as it was during the boom a
decade ago, but in Northern Europe double-digit annual increases were not un-
common in 2017. This boom is an additional reason for monetary policy makers
to raise interest rates.
In the eastern part of the region, monetary policies are likely to tighten in com-
ing years, even as inflation has recently fallen (figure 1.4). High inflation in 2015
and 2016 was part of a one-time price adjustment after the fall in oil prices and
the subsequent unavoidable depreciations of exchange rates. That adjustment
FIGURE 1.4 Normalization
of inflation in Europe and 9
Central Asia continues 8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2– 011 3M01 2013M08 2014M03 2014M10 2015M05 2015M12 2016M07 2017M02 2017M09 2018M04
Eastern ECA Western ECA
htnom-eerht
revo
egnahc
egatnecreP
raey
suoiverp
ni
egareva
Source: World Bank.
Note: Western ECA is the unweighted average of 29 countries: Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxemburg, Latvia, Macedonia, the Netherlands, Portugal,
Romania, Serbia, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and Turkey. Eastern ECA is the unweighted average of nine
countries: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, the Russian Federation, and Tajikistan.
Chapter 1: Economic Developments and Prospects ● 9
FIGURE 1.5 Housing prices
in the European Union have 12
risen since 2013
8
4
0
2006Q1 2007Q2 2008Q3 2009Q4 2011Q1 2012Q2 2013Q3 2014Q4 2016Q1 2017Q2
–4
–8
has been completed. Further inflation should now be controlled by central banks,
which have to build their credibility with floating exchange rates. Now that oil
prices are recovering, tighter monetary policies make sense, as they can allow
higher prices to be absorbed by appreciating currencies.
Tighter monetary policy and rising interest rates will restrain domestic growth
and reduce capital flows to emerging economies. The capital flows that were
searching for yields in emerging economies when interest rates in high-income
countries were close to zero will likely decline, moderating growth in countries with
large external funding needs. In such an environment, a cyclical downturn is more
likely than further acceleration or even stabilization of growth at current levels.
That slowdown may already be happening. The Purchasing Managers’ Index,
which combines various indicators in the manufacturing sector (new orders,
inventory levels, production, deliveries, employment), has fallen in the re-
gion since the beginning of 2018 (figure 1.6, panel a). The drop from the peak
reached in the last six months was particularly large in France, Germany, Italy,
Turkey, and the United Kingdom, even if the index was still above 50, indicat-
ing growth (figure 1.6, panel b).
The coming cyclical downturn is expected to be modest, mainly because, with
few exceptions, there are no signs of overheating that require sharp corrections.
Investment ratios are still at balanced levels, and no steep declines in those ratios
are expected. Inflation is at normal levels, and monetary tightening can be very
gradual. GDP growth for the region is expected to fall from 2.7 percent in 2017 to
2.3 percent in 2018 and 2.1 percent in 2019.
The expected slowdown is very similar for the eastern and western parts of
the region. However, there are marked differences between smaller subregions.
In the eastern part of the region, almost all the slowdown in growth is forecast to
come from Turkey, with a modest strengthening of growth in oil-exporting coun-
tries. In the western part of the region, the slowdown is expected to be rather
evenly distributed among members of the European Union, and some accelera-
tion of growth is expected in the Western Balkans.
htworg
egatnecrep
launnA
Nominal housing prices Housing prices deflated with CPI
Sources: Data from Eurostat and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
10 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
FIGURE 1.6 The Purchasing
Managers’ Index reached
an all-time high in Europe
and Central Asia in 2018 60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44
M01 M07 M01 M07 M01 M07 M01 M07 M01
2014 2014 2015 2015 2016 2016 2017 2017 2018
Although there are good reasons to expect only a modest deceleration of
growth, a sharper correction is possible. Cyclical forces can easily reinforce one
another, and additional shocks—including rising protectionism, geopolitical ten-
sions, and larger than expected disruptions from Brexit—could slow growth.
Does the region have the capacity for countercyclical policies? There is no
room for further monetary stimulus; at most, the expected monetary tightening
could be delayed slightly. The region has rebuilt some fiscal buffers. The average
fiscal deficit is estimated to have been just above 1 percent of GDP in 2017, down
from 6 percent of GDP during the 2009 crisis; it is close to levels at the end of the
boom that preceded that crisis (figure 1.7). Fiscal stimulus is thus an option in
several countries in the event of a sharper than expected slowdown. Under the
baseline scenario of only a modest deceleration, further buildup of fiscal buffers
seems the best strategy.
eulav
xednI
Europe and Central Asia World
65
63
61
59
57
55
53
51
49
47
45
Czech
Republic France Germany Hungary Italy P Ro ul sa sin ad
n
Federation Spain Turk Ue niy
ted
Kingdom
eulav
xednI
a. Recent weakening was stronger in Europe and Central Asia than in the rest of the world
b. Weakening occurred in all of the region’s major economies
Max October 2017–March 2018
March 2018
March 2016
Source: World Bank.
Note: A value of more than 50 indicates expansion.
Chapter 1: Economic Developments and Prospects ● 11
FIGURE 1.7 Government
d fae llfi ec nit ss
h
in
ar
t ph le
y
sre ing cio en
2
h 0a 0v 9e 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
–7
Two additional questions are worth investigating. Did countries in the region
use the recovery to adjust the structure of their economies, to better equip them
for future challenges? Why has potential growth been slower since the crisis than
it was during the boom that preceded it? The rest of this chapter addresses these
questions.
The region has shifted toward more exports. . .
The biggest and most important adjustment during the recovery has been the
shift of production capacity toward exports. Despite the slowdown in global
trade, the share of exports in GDP is now 10 percentage points higher than it was
during the 2000s (figure 1.8). This shift is important, because the economic struc-
ture during the 2003–07 boom, when growth in many countries in the region was
driven largely by expansion of nontradable sectors, was no longer sustainable.
During that boom, capital inflows, oil revenues, and inflows of remittances re-
sulted in increased domestic spending and a related loss in international com-
petitiveness. In the new normal after the crisis, all three forms of foreign inflows
are more moderate. The change has created the opportunity to become more
competitive in international markets while reducing investments in real estate
and other nontradable sectors.
Imports have also increased as a share of GDP, albeit by less than exports. The
overall current account surplus of the region has thus increased, largely because
the deficits that Central European countries financed with massive capital in-
flows during the boom have disappeared. These inflows came with a sharp de-
cline in investment ratios in those countries.
This adjustment is similar to the correction in East Asia after the 1998 financial
crisis (box 1.1). During the 1990s, emerging East Asian economies received large
capital inflows after they opened up to global markets, just as Central Europe did
later, during the 2000s. The reversal of capital flows in 1998 had similar effects on
East Asia as the 2008 crisis did on Central Europe.
ecnalab
tnemnrevog
lareneG
)PDG
fo
tnecrep(
ACE
ni
Source: World Economic Outlook, April 2018.
12 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
FIGURE 1.8 Since the crisis,
production in Europe and 50
Central Asia has shifted
toward exports 45
40
35
30
25
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
. . . and adapted to technological change
Apart from this macroeconomic adjustment, countries are adapting to the rapid
change in technologies caused by the digital revolution, which has far-reaching
consequences for the way production, labor, and commerce are organized. The
analysis of how countries are adapting is beyond the scope of this chapter. Chap-
ter 2 examines ECA’s involvement in some of these new technologies.
In both regions, large current account deficits during the boom were financed
with capital inflows that were reversed during the crisis. Emerging economies in
East Asia received large capital inflows during the 1990s, after they opened their
economies to global markets. Central European economies received large flows
of foreign direct investment and other capital before and during their accession
to the European Union. Their aggregate current account deficit widened to more
than 8 percent of GDP in 2007. Heavy borrowing in foreign markets increased the
vulnerability of both corporate and financial sectors to capital flow reversals
(Truman 2013). In both cases, the reversal of capital inflows led to a steep and
immediate decline in investment rates. In East Asia the loss in income was larger,
so the immediate fall in investment rates was greater. Investments rates bounced
back subsequently, but they remained below the preceding boom levels.
A combination of factors caused the decline in labor
productivity after the crisis
Growth in ECA returned to precrisis levels in 2017. It has not been strong enough
to compensate for the production losses that have occurred since the crisis, how-
ever (figure 1.9). Moreover, as little spare capacity is left, it is unlikely that these
losses can be recouped in the coming years. Thus not only actual growth but also
potential growth has declined since the crisis.
tnecreP
Nominal export share of GDP Nominal import share of GDP
Source: World Bank.
Chapter 1: Economic Developments and Prospects ● 13
BOX 1.1 Similarities between recoveries in Central Europe after 2009
and East Asia in the late 1990s
The recovery of economies in Central Europe from was much greater. Five years after the crisis began,
the 2008–09 global financial crisis was comparable GDP in East Asia was 37 percent below its precri-
to the recovery of East Asia following the 1998 sis level. In Central Europe, the corresponding loss
financial crisis. Both recoveries took about eight was 20 percent.
years. In East Asia, however, the impact of the crisis
FIGURE B1.1.1 Recovery in Central Europe was similar to recovery after Asian financial crisis
t-1 t t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t+6 t+7 t+8
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
–60
sunim
xedni
PDG
laeR
lautcaf
retnuoc
a. The postcrisis loss in real GDP in b. . . . but recovery from the global
Central Europe was smaller than in East Asia… financial crisis took as long
t-10 t-8 t-6 t-4 t-2 t t+2 t+4 t+6 t+8
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12
–14
–16
East Asia and Pacific (t = 1998; 1997 = 100) –18 East Asia and Pacific (t = 1998)
Central Europe (t = 2009; 2008 = 100) Central Europe (t = 2009)
sunim
htworg
PDG
laeR
etar
htworg
egareva
sisircerp
Source: Data from World Development Indicators and Eurostat.
Note: The postcrisis counterfactual real GDP series were constructed assuming that annual GDP growth remained at the precrisis
average growth rates. East Asia and Pacific includes Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
FIGURE B1.1.2 Investment rates adjusted immediately to reversal in capital flows
a. Central European economies ran larger current b. . . . and experienced lower investment
account deficits during the precrisis boom period . . . rates in the years after the crisis
10 35
8
30 6
4
25
2
0
t-10 t-8 t-6 t-4 t-2 t t+2 t+4 t+6 t+8 20 –2
–4
15
–6
–8
10
–10 t-10 t-8 t-6 t-4 t-2 t t+2 t+4 t+6 t+8
erahs
sa
tnemtsevnI
)tnecrep(
PDG
fo
Central Europe East Asia and Pacific Central Europe East Asia and Pacific
ecnalab
tnuocca
tnerruC
)tnecrep(
PDG
fo
erahs
sa
Source: Data from World Development Indicators and Eurostat.
Note: East Asia and Pacific includes Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.
(Continued next page)
14 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
BOX 1.1 (continued)
In both regions, large current account defi- than 8 percent of GDP in 2007. Heavy borrowing
cits during the boom were financed with capital in foreign markets increased the vulnerability of
inflows that were reversed during the crisis. Emerg- both corporate and financial sectors to capital flow
ing economies in East Asia received large capital reversals (Truman 2013). In both cases, the rever-
inflows during the 1990s, after they opened their sal of capital inflows led to a steep and immediate
economies to global markets. Central European decline in investment rates. In East Asia the loss in
economies received large flows of foreign direct income was larger, so the immediate fall in invest-
investment and other capital before and dur- ment rates was greater. Investments rates bounced
ing their accession to the European Union. Their back subsequently, but they remained below the
aggregate current account deficit widened to more preceding boom levels.
FIGURE 1.9 Even after full
recovery, the effects of the
global financial crisis remain
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
–2
–3
–4
–5
)tnecrep(
htworg
PDG
launnA
a. Annual growth in the European Union is back to the precrisis average. . .
Real GDP growth in the European Union
Average growth in the European Union, 1996–2017
b. . . . but lasting damage remains
4
2
0
–2
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12
–14
–16
–18
,sisirc
retfa
ssol
PDG
evitalumuC
dnert
sisircerp
ot
evitaler
Source: Eurostat.
Chapter 1: Economic Developments and Prospects ● 15
In the region’s middle-income countries, slower labor productivity growth
caused most of the deceleration in potential growth; only 0.35 percentage points
of the slowdown in potential growth can be attributed to slowing labor supply
growth (World Bank 2018). The changing pace of capital deepening cannot ex-
plain this slowdown in labor productivity, most of which is reflected in total factor
productivity (TFP), the unexplained factor in production functions (figure 1.10).
Differences across countries were considerable, and many idiosyncratic events
occurred. But after the crisis, every country in the region except Ireland experi-
enced a decline in the contribution of TFP to labor productivity growth (figure
1.11). In most countries, TFP actually fell.
FIGURE 1.10 After the crisis,
labor productivity increased
4
at a slower rate
3
2
1
0
–11990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
rekrow
rep
PDG
laer
fo
htworg
launnA
)tnecrep(
seirtnuoc
ACE
lla
ni
Capital deepening contribution
TFP growth contribution
Labor productivity growth
Source: Penn World Table 9.0 dataset.
FIGURE 1.11 The contribution
12
of total factor productivity
(TFP) to labor productivity
10
growth declined after
the crisis
8
6 TJK
4
GEO
MDA
2 KAZ
IRL
POL KGZ
SVK
SR LBL TV UA
–4 –2 0 ITME AS LTP BPF HER AR LT RUA VTGBRS 2 MW KE DHE US NT C BIZ4 HE RORUU 6S UKRBLR 8 ARM10 12
–2 LUX CYPFIN
GRC AZE
–4
htworg
ytivitcudorp
robal
ot
PFT
yb
noitubirtnoC
)stniop
egatnecrep(
41–9002
Contribution by TFP to labor productivity growth 2003–08 (percentage points)
Source: Penn World Table 9.0 dataset.
16 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
Labor productivity growth can be decomposed into three components:
• changes in labor productivity within each economic sector (the within-sector
component)
• changes in labor productivity resulting from the reallocation of labor across
sectors (the shift component)
• a cross component that represents the interaction between the change in labor
productivity within a given sector and the change in labor input share of that
sector.5
As the third component is numerically insignificant, analysis of labor produc-
tivity growth can be based on the within-sector and shift components. This de-
composition reveals three important trends in the drivers of labor productivity in
Germany and some countries in ECA (figure 1.12).
• The deceleration in labor productivity growth in Germany started during the
1980s and continued in subsequent decades. Most of it was caused by weaker
productivity growth within sectors. This pattern is also evident in other major
European countries.
• The contribution of sectoral shifts to overall labor productivity growth in Ger-
many changed markedly over time. Between the 1970s and the start of the
2000s, the shift of employment toward more productive sectors increased la-
bor productivity growth by about half a percentage point. The contribution of
sectoral shifts to labor productivity growth fell to zero after 2000 and turned
negative around the time of the 2008 global financial crisis. The long-term
trend of labor shifting toward sectors with higher labor productivity, and
likely higher capital intensity, came to an end when the digital economy start-
ed in earnest (see below). The contribution to labor productivity growth of the
shift of labor to more productive sectors was greater in Central European
countries than in Germany before the crisis, but as in Germany, it diminished
FIGURE 1.12 Labor
productivity growth in 6
Germany is on a
5
long-term downward trend
4
3
2
1
0
–11971 1975 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015
–2
–3
–4
)tnecrep(
htworg
ytivitcudorp
robaL
Within-sector component Shift component
Source: Data from KLEMS dataset (available at http://www.euklems.net/). Data for years before 1995 are KLEMS estimates.
Note: Labor productivity is calculated as real value added per hour worked.
Chapter 1: Economic Developments and Prospects ● 17
after the crisis. This change is in line with the boom and bust in the growth in
FDI flows to these countries (EBRD 2015; World Bank 2018). During the boom
period, FDI inflows created high-productivity jobs. These flows plummeted
after the crisis. The contribution of the sectoral shift to productivity declined
also in Armenia after the crisis (box 1.2).
• Major crises—the second oil crisis of the late 1970s and the global financial
crisis—led to a permanent loss in productivity. Even where productivity
growth returned to the original (downward) trend, the damage of the crisis
was not recouped. Productivity remains below the levels that would have
been achieved had the crisis not occurred. The lasting impact of deep crises on
productivity growth may have been caused by the loss of capital and skills
that become obsolete or by a loss in confidence by workers who suffered ex-
tended bouts of unemployment.
The reasons for the long-term decline in within-sector labor productivity
growth, in many ECA countries and globally, have been debated in the economic
literature. The change in within-sector labor productivity can be decomposed
into changes generated by capital deepening and changes that cannot be ex-
plained (TFP). The contribution of capital deepening shrank significantly in sev-
eral, but not all, countries during the years around the 2008 crisis. And almost all
countries experienced a decline in within-sector TFP growth.
The literature has suggested several possible causes for the slowdown in TFP.
First, deep reforms led to a temporary rise in productivity growth in several ECA
BOX 1.2 A new normal in Armenia
Armenia’s economy changed markedly following led to an increase in labor productivity of 4 per-
the global crisis. Per capita GDP growth fell from centage points a year. Within-sector productivity
8.4 percent a year in 2003–09 to 3.2 percent a year growth contributed only 2.7 percentage points to
in 2010–16. Labor productivity growth was similar overall labor productivity growth, perhaps because
in the two periods (6.7 percent a year before the elevated domestic demand reduced competitive
crisis and 6.2 percent after), but migration flows, pressures on the supply side.
employment levels, and the composition of labor These patterns reversed in the aftermath of the
productivity growth changed dramatically. crisis. Emigration slowed, the population increased
During the boom, many people found jobs by 1.7 percent between 2010 and 2016, and the
abroad, especially toward the end of the period, construction sector and other nontradable sectors
when oil revenues skyrocketed in Russia. As a laid off workers. As a result, the share of the popu-
result, Armenia’s population declined by almost 5 lation that was employed fell to 34 percent. The
percent between 2003 and 2009. At the same time, impact of sectoral shifts on productivity growth
many jobs were created in construction and other turned negative, and the within-sector contribu-
nontradable sectors, to satisfy domestic demand tion to annual labor productivity growth increased
fueled by remittances. The combination of emi- to 7.4 percentage points. The increase may have
gration and job creation boosted the share of the reflected increased competition, as domestic
population that was employed from 36 percent in demand declined and production shifted toward
2003 to 40 percent in 2009. During those six years, goods and services that are tradable in interna-
the shift toward capital-intensive construction tional markets.
18 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
countries. Productivity growth subsequently fell when major aspects of the re-
form agenda were completed. In Central Europe, reforms connected to EU acces-
sion initially boosted the growth of GDP and productivity. Reform momentum,
and productivity growth, slowed after EU accession, in the mid-2000s (World
Bank 2018). In Central Asia and the South Caucasus, TFP growth accelerated in
the 1990s with institutional reforms in the early transition period. It plunged by
the beginning of 2000s, perhaps because such benefits diminished as the room for
further reforms narrowed.
Second, across the world, technological changes in advanced and emerging
economies affected the measurement and growth of productivity. The digital
revolution that began in the 1990s led to a massive shift of resources to informa-
tion and communications technology (ICT) industries. The output of these indus-
tries is notoriously difficult to measure (for example, how does one value free
Internet services financed by advertisements?). If the value of these new services
is understated, then aggregate measurements of productivity may also be under-
stated, particularly if growth slows in more traditional industries that are losing
labor and capital to the ICT sector. Given the magnitude of the slowdown, how-
ever, not all of it can be attributed to measurement issues (Syverson 2016).
The shift to ICT industries may also be connected to lower productivity. It is
costly and time consuming to overcome the special difficulties involved in com-
mercializing novel technologies (David 1990). Because it may take time to realize
the return on the labor and capital moving to these new industries, shifts of labor
and capital to (initially) low-return industries may depress aggregate productiv-
ity growth. In the United States, for example, the slowdown before the 2008 crisis
occurred mainly in industries that produce information technology (IT) services
or use such services intensively (Fernald 2015; Gordon 2016).
Third, declining flexibility in some advanced countries may be reducing pro-
ductivity growth. Business dynamism has declined in the United States, as re-
flected in the drop in reallocation rates for jobs (after 1990) and workers (after
2000) (Davis and Haltiwanger 2014), and the pace of startup creation in the
United States declined over the 2000s (Haltiwanger 2011). Across OECD coun-
tries, productivity growth in the most advanced firms remained robust over the
2000s, but the difference in productivity levels between leading and lagging firms
widened (Andrews, Criscuolo, and Gal 2015; Haltiwanger 2011). This phenome-
non may have deepened the productivity slowdown if barriers to the reallocation
of labor and capital intensified.
Fourth, long-term trends in the global economy may be contributing to the
slowdown in productivity growth. Aging and other demographic factors may
account for part of the decline (Maestas, Mullen, and Powell 2016). The slow-
down in global trade integration following the crisis may also be contributing to
slower TFP growth (Adler and others 2017).
No single factor is responsible for the observed deceleration of productivity
growth: long-term trends, sectoral shifts, reform momentums, and global crises
all play roles. No silver bullet can reignite productivity growth. Policy makers
need a diverse set of instruments to encourage innovation, build up skills and
infrastructure, and facilitate competition.
Chapter 1: Economic Developments and Prospects ● 19
Notes
1. That used to be the rule globally, but after the global financial crisis a decade ago, that
ratio came down closer to one. As illustrated in earlier ECA Economic Updates, the glob-
al decline in the income elasticity of trade has not materialized in Europe and Central
Asia.
2. Current real copper prices are also 57 percent below their historical peak, which was
reached in April 1974.
3. A key reform in Uzbekistan was the elimination of the dual exchange rate, which re-
duced domestic price distortions and opened up new export opportunities. The govern-
ment also reduced import duties and is harmonizing the duty code with Eurasian Eco-
nomic Union norms.
4. The much higher rate for youth unemployment is normal, for a variety of reasons.
Search unemployment is much higher for people entering the labor market than for
workers who already have jobs. Cyclical changes in unemployment also tend to be more
pronounced for young people. During crisis periods, the lack of job vacancies dispropor-
tionately hurts people entering the labor market for the first time. During economic re-
coveries the opposite happens, as the opening up of new vacancies disproportionately
benefits newcomers to the labor market.
5. This decomposition is based on sector-level data on real value added and the number of
hours worked. We follow the methodology of Molnar and Chalaux (2015).
References
Adler, Gustavo, Romain Duval, Davide Furceri, Sinem Kilic Celik, Ksenia
Koloskova, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2017. “Gone with the Headwinds:
Global Productivity.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 2017/04, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Andrews, Dan, Chiara Criscuolo, and Peter N. Gal. 2015. Frontier Firms, Technology
Diffusion and Public Policy: Micro Evidence from OECD Countries. The Future of
Productivity: Main Background Papers. OECD Publishing, Paris. http://www.
oecd.org/eco/growth/Frontier-Firms-Technology-Diffusion-and-Public-
Policy-Micro-Evidence-from-OECD-Countries.pdf.
David, Paul A. 1990. “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective
on the Modern Productivity Paradox.” American Economic Review 80 (2): 355–61.
http://www.dklevine.com/archive/refs4115.pdf.
Davis, Steven, and John Haltiwanger. 2014. “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic
Performance.” NBER Working Paper 20479, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w20479.
EBRD (European Bank of Reconstruction and Development). 2015. Transition
Report 2015–16: Rebalancing Finance. London: European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development.
Fernald, John G. 2014. “Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and
after the Great Recession,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 29: 1–51. https://doi.
org/10.1086/680580.
Gordon, Robert J. 2016. “Perspectives on the Rise and Fall of American Growth.”
American Economic Review 106 (5): 72–76. DOI: 10.1257/aer.p20161126.
20 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
Haltiwanger, John. 2011. “Firm Dynamics and Productivity Growth.” European
Investment Bank Papers 16 (1): 116–36. https://ssrn.com/abstract=1984016.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and David Powell. 2016, “The Effect of
Population Aging on Economic Growth, the Labor Force and Productivity.”
NBER Working Paper 22452, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w22452.
Molnar, M., and T. Chalaux. 2015. “Recent Trends in Productivity in China: Shift-
Share Analysis of Labour Productivity Growth and the Evolution of the
Productivity Gap.” OECD Economics Department Working Paper 1221,
OECD Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js1j15rj5zt-en.
Syverson, Chad. 2016. “Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the U.S.
Productivity Slowdown.” NBER Working Paper 21974, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w21974.
World Bank. 2018. “Global Economic Prospects Broad-Based Upturn, but for
How Long?” January. Washington, DC.
22
Cryptocurrencies and
Blockchain: Hype or
Transformational
Technologies?
Overview
• The emergence of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies is part of a
broader wave of technologies that facilitate peer-to-peer (P2P) commerce, in-
dividualization of products, and flexibilization of production methods. For a
variety of reasons, this wave gained traction after the global financial crisis a
decade ago. Large digital platforms, such as Alibaba, Amazon, Uber, and
Airbnb, are replacing many brick-and-mortar stores, service companies, and
long-term employment relationships.
• Blockchain technologies aim to go one step farther. They organize P2P trans-
actions and P2P information flows without companies that operate digital
platforms. Whether these technologies will completely eliminate middlemen
or whether new forms of trusted intermediaries will emerge remains to be seen.
• Cryptocurrencies are the first—and therefore most developed—application of
blockchain technologies. They create money without central banks and facili-
tate payments without financial institutions. The success of several cryptocur-
rencies puts competitive pressure on transaction methods by existing finan-
cial institutions. However, serious limitations have become apparent.
Decentralized organization of markets without trusted intermediaries can be
very costly, and the volatility of the value of cryptocurrencies is a big obstacle
to their becoming an alternative to legal tender.
2211
22 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
• Other potential applications of blockchain technologies, from smart contracts
to decentralized databases and open source social networks, could well be-
come more transformational than cryptocurrencies. Current experiments are
likely to result in lasting innovations, even if current applications do not stand
the test of time.
• The emergence of blockchain technologies has triggered a flurry of activities
in Europe and Central Asia (ECA), where people use cryptocurrencies for
cross-border transactions and as speculative investments. Start-up companies
are mining cryptocurrencies and providing blockchain services. Governments
are experimenting with blockchain technologies to make their services more
secure and more transparent.
• Many factors provide a fertile ground for these activities in ECA. Several gov-
ernments actively support innovation by start-ups. Governments are eager to
digitize and streamline their services. Lack of trust in existing financial inter-
mediation makes cryptocurrencies an interesting alternative in some coun-
tries. Cryptocurrencies are also used to sidestep oversight of cross-border
transfers. Cheap electricity (in Iceland and Georgia, for example) entices the
mining of cryptocurrencies.
• Cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies pose a range of policy chal-
lenges. They include the need to (a) apply rules of financial oversight, con-
sumer protection, and tax administration while at the same time encouraging
and facilitating innovation; (b) deal with the massive volume of electricity
used to mine cryptocurrencies; and (c) determine whether governments and
central banks can use blockchain technologies to improve their services. Poli-
cymakers should find a balance between curbing the hype and unleashing
potentially transformational new opportunities. International coordination is
needed to share best practices, avoid regulatory arbitrage, and explore how to
regulate global decentralized networks.
Introduction
Ten years after an ingenious experiment to create a cryptocurrency that allows
secure and anonymous digital transactions to take place without the involve-
ment of central banks or commercial banks, cryptocurrencies have become a
multibillion-dollar industry. By December 2017, the average price of one bitcoin
(the first cryptocurrency) had risen from just a few cents in 2009 to $15,000, dou-
bling its value in a single month. These gains attracted many investors across the
world. On December 1, 2017, the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission
approved trading in bitcoin futures. Although the price of a bitcoin had declined
to about $8,000 in April 2018, the value of bitcoins in circulation was about $150
billion as of April 10, 2018.
Big companies, and individuals working together in large pools, are compet-
ing for the right to add new transactions to the existing chain of transactions.
Their revenues, in the form of new bitcoins and transaction fees, are close to $20
million a day.
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 23
In the wake of bitcoin’s success, hundreds of alternative cryptocurrencies
have been created. Digital tokens have been issued as general currency; for spe-
cific purposes (for example, to rent computer capacity or cloud storage); and as
an alternative to traditional shares in companies.
Cryptocurrencies have evoked strong reactions. Critics call these virtual cur-
rencies a bubble, a scam, and even evil (Krugman 2013; Popper 2018). Supporters
predict that cryptocurrencies will ultimately replace money (Rooney 2018).
There is less disagreement about the underlying blockchain technology, a pro-
tocol to achieve decentralized consensus about the validity of a common data-
base, stored in multiple locations. Many recognize that the blockchain protocol
can lead to tamper-proof, secure information systems without the need for a
single administrator. But even here views differ markedly about how transforma-
tional this technology is. Believers foresee utopian societies of self-regulating in-
dividuals, without government or trusted intermediaries. Doubters argue that
the number of useful applications has been exaggerated, that lack of regulation
can have disastrous effects, and that in most cases trusted intermediaries will
continue to provide useful services.
It is unclear how these technologies will develop in the long run. Conceivably,
they could be absorbed by existing institutions, with central banks issuing digital
cash, governments using blockchain to maintain information systems, and com-
mercial banks putting payment systems on the blockchain.1 Many intermediaries
might become obsolete, and many new financial instruments might be created by
companies that do not yet exist. The main legacy of cryptocurrencies may not be
the blockchain technology but standardized digital IDs using a combination of
public and private keys on open-source software.2 Such a development would
allow individuals to own more of their data, instead of participating in proprie-
tary information networks (Johnson 2018).
Whatever the future brings, cryptocurrencies and blockchain protocols are
part of a tidal wave of new technologies that is changing the way production and
commerce are organized. Digital platforms, the sharing economy, apps, and 3D
printers are fragmenting production and facilitating P2P transactions.
Many of these new applications originated soon after the global financial cri-
sis of 2008, when the bankruptcies of established companies convinced many
people that the economy would never be the same again. Investors were looking
for new investment opportunities. Workers who had lost their jobs were willing
to accept more flexible working relations. Consumers were persuaded to use
some of their underutilized assets commercially.
The fact that bitcoin was created in 2009, soon after the crisis, was probably no
coincidence. Trust in financial institutions had eroded, and the time was ripe to
explore fundamentally different approaches. Whatever the future of cryptocur-
rencies and blockchain technologies may be, the trends toward decentralization
and P2P transactions are unmistakable.
Cryptocurrency and blockchain activities are widespread in Europe and Cen-
tral Asia (ECA). Massive mining of cryptocurrencies takes place in Iceland, Swe-
den, and Georgia. Many Russians own digital wallets, and experiments are ongo-
ing in Serbia and Tajikistan to use blockchain technology to make the sending of
24 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
remittances more efficient (UNDP 2018). Estonia is using blockchain software in
registries and plans to extend its use to medicine (https://e-estonia.com/). Start-
ups in many countries in ECA are contributing to these technologies, attracting
finance for their activities via initial coin offerings (ICOs).3 Household invest-
ments in cryptocurrencies are not insignificant. Switzerland aims to become a
cryptocurrency and blockchain hub and is leading in adjusting regulations to
these new technologies.
Comprehensive, global information on cryptocurrency and blockchain activi-
ties is not available. But anecdotal evidence suggests that ECA is more active than
many other parts of the world, likely because of a combination of factors. Gov-
ernments of many countries—from Estonia to Georgia and Slovenia—are experi-
menting with blockchain technologies. In many countries in the region, a sup-
portive business climate encourages start-ups. And, especially in the eastern part
of the region, the relatively new financial sector provides fertile ground for ex-
periments. The lack of legacy technologies in the financial sector—and the lack of
trusted intermediaries—makes exploring new financial instruments attractive.
The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. Section 2.2 looks at the suc-
cesses and drawbacks of cryptocurrencies, examining whether there is a future
for money not issued by central banks. Section 2.3 looks at the possibility of smart
contracts. It assesses whether markets can be organized without intermediaries
and explores the possibility of secure decentralized databases. Section 2.4 sum-
marizes some of the activities in ECA, with an emphasis on the experience in
Georgia, which has been particularly active. Section 2.5 addresses the many pol-
icy challenges these new technologies have triggered.
Creating digital money without central banks
Since the emergence of e-commerce, myriad attempts have been made to develop
electronic payment systems.4 Many successful and unsuccessful attempts were
linked to credit card systems.
Attempts to create digital cash are especially thought-provoking. Like coins
and banknotes, digital cash should be anonymous and counterfeit-proof. People
should be able to use it without the intermediation of banks, in the same way
traditional cash is used outside the banking system. But unlike traditional cash,
individuals, rather than a central bank, would create these digital coins. Private
parties rather than the government would thus accrue the seigniorage.
The white paper that started bitcoin in 2008 outlined a way to create and oper-
ate a decentralized electronic cash system (Nakamoto 2008). The payment system
would not be under the control of a bank or a central authority. Rather, a large
number of independent participants would operate it. The paper used existing
cryptographic techniques of public and private keys to create anonymous and
secure IDs. It used existing cryptographic time stamps, based on hash functions,
to make past transactions irreversible. With those elements, electronic cash could
become (pseudo)anonymous and counterfeit-proof.5 But the main contribution
of the white paper was the method it proposed to keep track of past transactions
without a trusted intermediary. It would be done through an automatic process
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 25
that would achieve consensus among most participants about the cumulative
history of transactions, even if a minority of participants sent erroneous messages
to the network.
The solution to this so-called distributed consensus problem was to let partici-
pants compete for permission to add a new batch of transactions to the decentral-
ized database. Participants use their computer power to solve a difficult puzzle.
The solution, which is considered proof of work, is impossible to find analyti-
cally; it can be reached only through trial and error. The first person who solves
the puzzle can add a block of new transactions to the chain of existing transac-
tions—hence the term blockchain—and broadcast the new block to the network,
so that all participants can update the blockchain in their own copy.6
Although the puzzle is difficult to solve, its solution is easy to verify. There-
fore, the nodes in the bitcoin network can easily determine if a proposed block is
valid and should be added to the chain. Even if a node goes offline for a period
of time, the network is not jeopardized. When the node goes back online, it ac-
cepts the longest valid chain as the correct one. If most of the computer power is
owned by honest participants, the expectation is that they will create the longest
chain, as the probability that they add new blocks is proportional to their com-
puter power. As a result, the longest chain can be considered the consensus view.
If a dishonest participant adds a block that is not accepted by others in the chain,
that block will not become part of the longest chain, because the participant will
not have enough computer power to add more blocks to the chain quickly
enough. The difficulty of the puzzle is adjusted every two weeks, in order to cre-
ate about one block per 10 minutes. Limiting the addition of a new block to the
blockchain to one every 10 minutes (on average) prevents the network from be-
ing overwhelmed and keeps the size of the blockchain manageable.
Competition for the right to add a block to the blockchain also solved the
problem of the creation of new electronic coins. People who solve the puzzle re-
ceive a combination of newly minted coins and transaction fees.7 With every
block, new coins are created. Every four years the number of new coins per block
is cut in half, until the maximum number of 21 million bitcoins is reached. Most
of the remaining bitcoins will be added over the next 15 years. The creation of
new digital coins is like unearthing gold, which is why the puzzle solvers are
called miners in the world of cryptocurrencies.
Ten years after the publication of the white paper, the concepts underlying
bitcoin have proven successful. The blockchain technology is working and se-
cure. Seventeen million bitcoins have been created, with an aggregate value of
$137 billion in 2018. Numerous alternative cryptocurrencies have emerged, and
many companies and research groups are exploring additional blockchain ap-
plications. Cryptocurrencies have unleashed a wave of financial innovations,
putting competitive pressure on the financial sector, especially its facilitation of
cross-border transfers.
Bitcoin’s biggest success has also become its most worrisome weakness. The
proof-of-work concept that ensured achievement of a decentralized consensus
has become excessively costly and wasteful. Attracted by the reward of newly
minted digital coins, investors have created massive computer power with spe-
cialized chips to compete for permission to add a block to the blockchain. Over
26 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
the past few months, the reward for solving the puzzle ranged from $100,000 to
$250,000, depending on the price of bitcoin, the fees per transaction, and the
number of transactions in a block. As more computer power was added to the
network, the puzzle automatically became more difficult (figure 2.1). As a result,
more and more electricity was needed to solve the puzzle.
The system currently consumes an estimated 53 TWh of electricity a year—
almost as much as the entire country of Bangladesh consumes (Digiconomist
n.d.). The cost of electricity used to process a single average transaction (about
$20) can power about five households in a high-income country for a day.
These electricity costs are likely to rise. Because miners’ profits of are still
large, more computer power is being added to the network, increasing the diffi-
culty of the puzzle. People who use the network to transfer bitcoins do not di-
rectly experience these costs, because miners are paid mainly through seignior-
age rather than fees. But the costs in terms of electricity use, and the resulting
burden on the environment, are real.
A paradoxical side-effect of the rapid increase in computing power is that
computer power has become more concentrated. A few companies have installed
huge computer capacity in large dedicated factories, using specialized chips.
Their exploitation of economies of scale leads to concentration of market power.
Participants with less computer power started working together in pools (fig-
ure 2.2). With limited computing power, the probability of being the first to solve
the puzzle is very small, and the income stream is irregular and thus unpredictable.
By pooling forces, participants can generate a small but steady income stream.
This concentration of computer power makes the network more vulnerable to
malicious attacks. Even without attacks, if the market becomes an oligopoly, min-
ers could manipulate transaction fees, refuse to process certain types of transac-
tions, or deny service to users.
FIGURE 2.1 As the price
of bitcoin soared in 2017, 3.5E+12
so did competition
3E+12
among miners
2.5E+12
2E+12
1.5E+12
1E+12
5E+11
0
1-Mar-16 1-May-16 1-Jul-16 1-Sep-16 1-Nov-16 1-Jan-17 1-Mar-17 1-May-17 1-Jul-17 1-Sep-17 1-Nov-17 1-Jan-18 1-Mar-18
xednI
ytlucffiiD
gniniM
Source: blockchain.info.
Note: The bitcoin difficulty index measures the difficulty of finding a new block on the blockchain. The greater the difficulty, the longer the time it
takes on average for a miner to find a valid block. The difficulty in the first block of the bitcoin blockchain was 1. The difficulty is adjusted up or
down every 2,016 blocks. If the previous 2,016 blocks take less than two weeks to generate, the difficulty is increased (and vice versa).
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 27
FIGURE 2.2 Three large
mining pools provide GBMiners Bitcoin.com
0%
half of all network blocks 1% BW.COM
1% KanoPool
BitClub Network 1%
58COIN
3%
1%
BitFury
BTCC Pool 3% BTC.com
4% 24%
F2Pool
7%
Unknown
9%
AntPool
13%
BTC.TOP
10%
ViaBTC
SlushPool
12%
11%
Source: blockchain.info.
Note: Data are for March 2018.
The danger of market concentration is likely to increase. As the number of
newly minted bitcoins declines, the income of miners will increasingly depend
on fees. Lower profits will discourage new investors from entering the market,
and smaller, inefficient miners are likely to exit. The sustainability of a completely
decentralized payment system will be tested if miners must forgo the large prof-
its coming from seigniorage.
An advantage of declining profits because of disappearing seigniorage is that
electricity use will no longer increase and might even decline. Box 2.1 models the
long-term mechanisms determining the degree of difficulty of the puzzle, energy
use, user fees, and even the price of bitcoins. The model is simplistic, particularly
as it ignores adjustment lags and speculative bubbles, which likely play a signifi-
cant role in reality. But it sheds light on balancing mechanisms in the cryptocur-
rency market and provides a framework for exploring the consequences of the
disappearance of seigniorage.
As of spring 2018, the total reward a miner received per transaction was just
below $100 (figure 2.3). Most of it comes through seignorage (the bitcoin block
reward) rather than fees. The impact on the demand for bitcoin if this reward
shifts away from seignorage toward fees may not be dramatic. Large interna-
tional bank transfers can involve similar levels of fees (through the SWIFT inter-
national payment system).
28 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
BOX 2.1 Equilibrium mechanisms in the bitcoin market
Over time, as fewer and fewer bitcoins are created, power should be expected, which will increase the
the income of miners will shift from seigniorage difficulty of the puzzle. In equilibrium, the difficulty
toward fees. This box models the consequences of of the puzzle is given by
the shift for electricity use and other characteristics
(2.1.5)
of the mining process.
Assume that miners use the following produc-
Demand for transactions by consumers is down-
tion function to solve the puzzle that allows them
ward sloping in the size of the transaction fees:
to add transactions to the blockchain:
(2.1.6)
(2.1.1)
where TD is the total desired number of transac-
where TS is the total number of transactions miners
tions miners supply, and B is a scaling factor. The
supply, A is the level of technology, K is the capi-
fees will be determined by the condition
tal stock, E is the electricity consumption, and D
(2.1.7)
is the difficulty of the puzzle. There is substitution
between capital and electricity: miners can install If consumers want more transactions than min-
more advanced, more electricity-efficient equip- ers can facilitate, fees will go up and demand for
ment to achieve the same solution power with less transactions will adjust. Miners are constrained by
electricity. the rule that only one block with not many more
Miners minimize costs under the restriction of than 2,000 transactions can be added to the block-
the production function, where the cost per trans- chain. This restriction is represented by T. Conse-
action is quently, fees are determined by consumer prefer-
ences and the maximum number of transactions
(2.1.2)
allowed in the system:
where c is the cost per transaction, r is the return to
capital, δ is the depreciation rate of the equipment, (2.1.8)
P is the price of the capital goods, and P is the
h e
price of electricity. The final price to endogenize is the price of a bit-
This optimization leads to the following cost per coin. Currently, speculative behavior, which is very
transaction c: difficult to model, is likely to be one of the deter-
minants of that price. A standard money demand
(2.1.3) function can describe the main determinants:
If there are profits, new miners will keep enter- (2.1.9)
ing the market, which will cause the difficulty of the
where p is the price of bitcoin, a is the aver-
puzzle to adjust so that in equilibrium profits equal
age size of transactions, and V is the velocity of
zero:
money. If people want to keep bitcoins in their
(2.1.4) wallet because they expect the price to rise, then
where n is the block reward in terms of the number the velocity of circulation will fall and the current
of newly minted bitcoins, p is the price of bitcoin, price will rise. If people want to transfer larger val-
and f are the fees. ues with bitcoins, pushing up the average value of
The market is not yet in equilibrium. Miners’ transactions, the price will also rise. These factors
profits are still large, as is the risk-adjusted return. may have been the two main drivers behind the
As a result, still more investments in computing sharp increase in the bitcoin price in December
(Continued next page)
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 29
BOX 2.1 (continued)
2017. Market participants bought bitcoins to trans- created. A decline in n reduces the energy use per
fer large sums, and speculation pushed the price transaction. Increasing the price of energy can also
farther up. In equilibrium the bitcoin price would reduce energy use. Such a price increase would
be given by not increase the cost of transactions, it would
merely reduce the difficulty of the puzzle, as some
(2.1.10)
miners are pushed out of the market. Increasing
where MS is the exogenously given number of bit- the overall energy efficiency of mining (increasing
coins in circulation. Substituting this result in the A in equation 2.1.1) does not reduce energy use. It
difficulty expression yields merely makes the puzzle more difficult.
The long-term equilibrium can be achieved at a
(2.1.11) lower electricity use, but this raises other concerns.
It could lead to even more concentration of min-
The reduced-form equation for energy use per ing power, as in the process many miners would
transaction is exit the market, making it easier for highly special-
ized mining facilities to capture larger shares of the
(2.1.12) computational power. The concentration of mining
power could erode trust in the network and thus
This model suggests that the system could reduce incentives to hold bitcoins long, increasing
achieve a long-term equilibrium in which electricity the velocity of money, which would cause a drop
consumption is lower because fewer bitcoins are in the price and further instability in the network.
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
23-Mar-16 18-May-16 13-Jul-16 7-Sep-16 2-Nov-16 28-Dec-16 22-Feb-17 19-Apr-17 14-Jun-17 9-Aug-17 4-Oct-17 29-Nov-17 24-Jan-18 21-Mar-18
)srallod(
srenim
fo
sgninraE
FIGURE 2.3 Most mining
revenue comes from the
seignorage (block reward)
of the network
Mining revenue per transaction Fees per transaction
Source: blockchain.info.
30 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
The lack of scalability of the bitcoin payment system is another limitation. The
proof-of-work concept prevents malicious participants from overwhelming the
blockchain, ensuring its veracity. But it limits the addition of new blocks to one
every 10 minutes and each block to a maximum size of 1 MB. The average num-
ber of transactions that can be included in a block of this size is 2,000. In its cur-
rent form, the bitcoin payment network can thus process only three transactions
per second. By contrast, credit card companies process thousands of transactions
per second. This constraint makes it impossible for bitcoin to substitute for large-
scale digital payment systems.
Many attempts have been made, through new cryptocurrencies or additions
to the bitcoin network, to avoid the electricity-consuming puzzle and to increase
scalability. A leading concept is proof of stake, which could replace proof of
work.8 In this concept, participants are elected to add a new block to the block-
chain on the basis of the amount of own coins they want to attach to the contract.
This proof-of-stake concept is like putting coins in escrow to earn permission to
intermediate and charge transaction fees. Selection would still be probabilistic,
but richer participants would have a higher probability of being selected. Ethe-
reum, which runs a popular cryptocurrency, may adopt this approach. It repre-
sents a shift back in the direction of trusted intermediaries. The concept is not
very different from existing financial institutions that are trusted because they
have a stake in preserving their company.
An even more radical departure from proof of work is to grant the authority
to maintain the blockchain to a limited number of preselected, trusted partici-
pants. Ripple has taken this approach, working with commercial banks. It rein-
states trusted intermediaries into the blockchain network.
Another experiment to reduce electricity costs is to design a simple, albeit less
secure, system for small transactions and to put only the balances of many small
transactions on the blockchain. Lightning Network is taking this approach, as an
addition to the bitcoin blockchain (Poon and Dryja 2016).
Most of the discussions in the cryptocurrency community are about mecha-
nisms to make trusted intermediaries superfluous. But another important ques-
tion is how well cryptocurrencies perform the traditional functions of money.
Money is useful because it can serve as medium of exchange, a unit of account,
and a store of value. Like other forms of electronic money, cryptocurrencies have
advantages over physical commodities like gold or banknotes. They are easier to
store and easier to transfer over large distances. However, some inherent draw-
backs of cryptocurrencies make them less optimal than legal tender in most
countries.
The most important drawback is the volatility of the purchasing power of
cryptocurrencies, as illustrated by their exchange rate vis-à-vis legal tender (fig-
ure 2.4). That volatility in purchasing power makes them very risky to accept as
a medium of exchange. It also makes them suboptimal as a store of value, as there
is no guarantee that their value will not drop to zero. Advocates argue that cryp-
tocurrencies cannot be inflationary, because their supply is fixed or at least lim-
ited. In fact, cryptocurrencies can be extremely inflationary if demand for them
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 31
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
28-Apr-1 23 8-Aug-1 23 8-Dec-1 23 8-Apr-1 24 8-Aug-1 24 8-Dec-1 24 8-Apr-1 25 8-Aug-1 25 8-Dec-1 25 8-Apr-1 26 8-Aug-1 26 8-Dec-1 26 8-Apr-1 27 8-Aug-1 27 8-Dec-17
Source: coinmarketcap.com.
Note: Panel a shows the percentage difference between the opening and closing price for the day. Panel b shows the percentage difference be-
tween the highest and lowest price in a day.
drops (because, for example, customers prefer alternative cryptocurrencies that
are more user-friendly, are more scalable, or provide more privacy). The volatility
of their purchasing power also reduces the value of cryptocurrencies as a unit of
measurement. With large overall price swings, it becomes difficult to discern
movements in relative prices.9
In fact, there may be a natural limit to how stable the price of bitcoin can be-
come. Unlike other commodity-type assets, bitcoin does not have a feedback loop
from the supply side.
)tnecrep(
egnar
yliaD
25,000 30
20
20,000
10
0
15,000
–10
10,000
–20
–30
5,000
–40
0 –50
28-Apr- 21 83 -Aug- 21 83 -Dec- 21 83 -Apr- 21 84 -Aug- 21 84 -Dec- 21 84 -Apr- 21 85 -Aug- 21 85 -Dec- 21 85 -Apr- 21 86 -Aug- 21 86 -Dec- 21 86 -Apr- 21 87 -Aug- 21 87 -Dec-17
)nioctib
rep
srallod(
ecirp
nioctiB
)tnecrep(
nruter
yliaD
FIGURE 2.4 Daily price
movements of bitcoin
continue to be large
Daily closing price (dollars, left-hand axis)
Daily return (percent, right-hand axis)
32 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
Sustained volatility can be very inefficient for a bitcoin-based economy. Ex-
tracting information about relative prices would be very costly. Entering into
long-term contracts could become prohibitively expensive.
The blockchain has proven to be very secure, but it is impossible to avoid se-
curity concerns altogether. Cryptocurrencies have been stolen by hacks into ex-
changes, where they are exchanged against legal tender or other cryptocurren-
cies, and hacks into mining pools. Users can protect stored cryptocurrencies by
keeping their wallets offline. These offline wallets are called cold wallets; wallets
that are online are called hot wallets. Exchanges cannot be avoided; they remain a
weak link. The problem is especially severe because once stolen there is little re-
course to recover the funds.
Many of these problems are already being addressed. The security breaches of
exchange sites forced many exchanges to use hot and cold wallets. This practice
involves storing most deposits in an offline wallet, whose private keys are secure
and are never stored on a network-connected device. A small portion of the de-
posits is transferred to the hot wallet, which is used for daily transactions and
payments. If there is a security breach, potential losses are limited to the amount
stored in the hot wallet; at least in theory, most deposits should be protected.
The attractiveness of cryptocurrencies will be tested once governments extend
their financial oversight to cryptocurrencies in their efforts to fight money laun-
dering, tax evasion, and illicit transactions. Doing so will challenge the (pseudo)
anonymity of the cryptocurrencies. This oversight will be easier if the concentra-
tion of mining power continues to increase. To the extent that current use is mo-
tivated partly by the desire to avoid oversight, increased surveillance will reduce
demand for cryptocurrencies. However, it is also possible that oversight may
make the use of cryptocurrencies more attractive, as it becomes easier to incorpo-
rate them in the overall financial infrastructure.
The innovative power of cryptocurrencies has been impressive. They have
already put some competitive pressure on cross-border payment systems. The
concept is promising, because it potentially improves financial access for people
who live in remote areas that are not covered by financial institutions.
It would be wrong to judge cryptocurrencies on the current state of affairs. As
with many new technologies, childhood diseases will be outgrown. However, their
real contribution may turn out to be very different from originally foreseen.
The original designer of bitcoin and the blockchain technology wrote that “the
main benefits are lost if a trusted third party is still required” (Nakamoto 2008).
In fact, the future benefits may appear precisely because the networks shift back
to trusted intermediaries. It is even conceivable that the most successful crypto-
currencies will be linked to legal tender and issued by central banks.
Creating digital markets without intermediaries
The ability to achieve distributed consensus, and to store immutable information
in a decentralized database, makes a wide variety of P2P contracts possible with-
out a centralized authority. Enthusiasm about other possibilities is enormous. As
one observer put it, “The paradox about bitcoin is that it may well turn out to be
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 33
a revolutionary breakthrough and at the same time a colossal failure as a cur-
rency” (Johnson 2018).
Smart, or self-executing, contracts are examples of blockchain applications
that go well beyond instantaneous transfers of funds with cryptocurrencies. Such
contracts could be used on a blockchain platform to engage in commitments over
time, without the help of middlemen. Ethereum, which has been operational
since the summer of 2015, enables the creation of P2P contracts that outline the
conditions under which future payments occur.
One example of such a smart contract is a parametric insurance contract, such
as a contract that insures farmers against drought. The seller commits to pay a
certain amount if rainfall remains below a certain threshold. The contract is pre-
programmed to read the realized rainfall from a trusted weather data feed at a
point in the future. The buyer purchases the contract with a one-time payment.
The seller commits funds equal to the maximum payout in case of a drought. As
the contract is fully collateralized, there is no counterparty risk. At the expiration
date, either the buyer or the seller can execute the contract to check if the trigger
condition has been met. The contract distributes the funds between the buyer and
the seller and terminates itself. This type of contract could be handled without
intermediation (although insurance companies could also provide such con-
tracts). Storing these contracts on the blockchain makes them immutable and
guarantees their enforcement.
Smart contracts could also be used for financial instruments other than insur-
ance. Entrepreneurs already sell tokens to fund new companies through ICOs
and promise future dividend payments in a smart contract on a blockchain. The
tokens are similar to shares issued in an initial public offering (IPO), but there are
key differences. Shares are sold on stock markets and typically give the right via
shareholder representation to participate in decision making. In contrast, tokens
are traded on a P2P blockchain with no privileges outside what is written in the
smart contract. Regulators across the world are working on directives that would
extend oversight to ICOs. Doing so would increase the similarities between ICOs
and IPOs, but the financial smart contract would provide a new, innovative, in-
strument to fund start-ups. It creates relatively liquid new financial instruments
that can be used to finance small-scale risky ventures.
The potential advantages of such P2P contracts are obvious. They could be
available to people who have no access to financial instruments (box 2.2). They
could also increase access to financial services that is now limited because of
distrust in financial institutions. Currently, enforcement of contracts is not
straightforward in parts of ECA. Smart contracts are secure, even if the counter-
parties do not know each other. Blockchain platforms could make these financial
products more liquid if the new products could be traded outside specialized
markets.
There are potential disadvantages of smart contracts. Adjustments to the cur-
rent blockchain platforms are likely required for them to work in a user-friendly,
efficient, and scalable way. These drawbacks may be the reason why, outside
ICOs, there have not yet been large-scale applications of smart contracts.
The first disadvantage of existing platforms is the volatility of the value of
cryptocurrencies, which is especially inconvenient with contracts that span many
34 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
BOX 2.2 Providing access to secure insurance
In many countries, individuals, farmers, and Especially in the transition economies of ECA,
small- to medium-size businesses have limited or financial markets are incomplete. Market-based
no access to insurance or hedging instruments financial institutions were established only in the
for commodity price risks, floods, hurricanes, early 1990s in these economies, and they are still
exchange rate volatility, and the like. Markets are only partially developed. Insurance products are
incomplete or not available. When they are avail- particularly underdeveloped. The insurance rate
able, contracts are often not trusted to be enforced of farmers in ECA is well below the global aver-
or are very costly, particularly for small transac- age (box figure 2.2.1). A recent report finds that
tions. Lack of this key financial service is associated these incomplete financial sectors are associated
with a high risk of falling into poverty, business fail- with lower growth of the bottom 40 percent of the
ure, and the absence of entrepreneurship. income distribution (Gould and Melecky 2017).
FIGURE B2.2.1 Farmers in Europe and Central Asia are underinsured
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Sub-Saharan Developing World South Asia Developing
Africa East Asia Europe and
and Pacific Central Asia
Suppose that a small wheat farmer in a develop- ers are not likely to have access to international
ing country is 30 days away from harvest. Although financial markets in which these contracts are well
she may be happy with the current wheat price, she established and markets are deep, and the need
knows that she can sustain at most a 20 percent for intermediaries can make the process prohibi-
drop between now and the time she sells her har- tively expensive.
vest. In order to hedge against a larger decline, the Government interventions to support such con-
farmer can purchase a put option with a duration tracts have often been ineffective. Such policies
of one month and a strike that is 20 percent lower are either too costly from the government fiscal
than the current market price. Entering in such a standpoint or create moral hazard if noninsured
contract will ensure that if the price falls below the risks are covered by government payouts in the
strike price, the contract will pay the difference. event of widespread loss.
The contract mitigates the risk by creating a price Blockchain technology and smart contracts
floor. raise the potential for insurance/minimum price
Despite the relative simplicity of these con- contracts that are flexible, low-cost, secure, and
tracts, many frictions may prevent small farmers highly customizable to a multitude of risks and
from entering into such agreements. Although payouts (large and small), with only marginal trans-
bilateral over-the-counter agreements are pos- actions costs. This approach would provide easy
sible, the legal framework may not be well adapted access to foreign insurers, and enforcement costs
to accommodate them, and enforcement can be would be low if the payout were collateralized in
difficult and costly. Small- and medium-size farm- the blockchain.
erutlucirga
ni
gnikrow
stludA
larutlucirga
desahcrup
ohw
suoiverp
eht
ni
ecnarusni
)egatnecrep
,1102(
shtnom
21
Source: World Bank Findex Survey.
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 35
years. Parties to the contract likely want security in terms of the purchasing
power of payments. That goal could possibly be met by linking the contracts to
futures markets, but it seems more promising to use tokens that are linked to le-
gal tender. Doing so would be a major step away from the original concept of
cryptocurrencies, as it requires a trusted party that can guarantee the value of the
token. Still, it could be a natural development of the smart contracts.
Fizzy is a parametric insurance application by the insurance company AXA
(https://fizzy.axa/), in which passengers purchase insurance by sending funds
to the smart contract along with their flight information. If their flight is delayed
for more than two hours according to a publicly accessible database, the smart
contracts pays out compensation in euros. Fizzy could be developed into an
Ethereum-based smart contract, but the volatility of the Ether token is likely to
prove too much of a drawback for a large-scale application.
If contracts shift to tokens that are linked to legal tender, the market can no
longer operate without a trusted intermediary. Such an intermediary must sell
additional tokens in exchange for legal tender if demand for tokens increases.
The intermediary must hold part of the legal tender in reserve, so that tokens can
be repurchased if demand declines. Such reserves are similar to the reserves fi-
nancial institutions must hold when they create electronic accounts or mobile
payment systems. In the case of tokens linked to legal tender, participants who
maintain the blockchain would no longer be rewarded with the seigniorage of
new coins; the reward would consist only of fees paid by the parties in the con-
tract. These fees might not be enough to attract enough participants who want to
compete with one another. It is plausible that such a system would naturally
converge to a permissioned blockchain, in which several preselected servers up-
date the blockchain, eliminating the need for costly competition among servers
and making the maintenance of the platform more efficient.
A second disadvantage of smart contracts is that they are collateralized by
freezing potential payouts on the blockchain. The blockchain provides security,
but it is also inefficient (like putting money in escrow, where it cannot be used
productively). Insurance companies can pool risks and invest the cash flow. As a
result, they should be able to provide cheaper services than offered in P2P con-
tracts, in which investing the cash flow is not possible. Cutting out insurance
companies could thus increase costs.
There may be a trade-off between efficiency and independence from interme-
diaries. Higher costs may be worth paying where the public does not trust that
normal contracts will be enforced. Where trust exists, the public might prefer to
deal with insurance companies rather than anonymous peers. If blockchain con-
tracts are used, trusted intermediaries will likely offer contracts without freezing
the assets in the contract, reintroducing trust into these transactions.
A similar argument holds for standard financial intermediation by banks. Be-
cause P2P contracts likely have a broader reach and can create innovative instru-
ments, they could provide competitive additions to existing banking products.
However, commercial banks have a big advantage in financial intermediation. By
pooling risk, they can turn short-term liabilities into long-term assets. Because
intermediation between savings and investments is much more difficult in inde-
pendent P2P contracts without risk pooling, smart contracts are likely to be com-
36 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
bined with, or even integrated into, existing financial institutions, rather than
replacing them. Risk pooling could also be explicitly programmed in smart con-
tracts, implying that these contracts will not be completely risk free.
A third potential disadvantage of following the original blockchain design for
smart contracts is the public nature of the blockchain. Transparency is attractive
because it makes it easy to audit the validity of contracts by virtually anyone with
an Internet connection. But participants in transactions may want more privacy.
Therefore, it is plausible that smart contract applications will develop in the di-
rection of more encryption, more restricted-read access, or both.10
Many governments are experimenting with blockchain to digitize their ser-
vices. Experiments with land and real estate registries are popular. One objective
is to avoid the vulnerabilities of a centralized server. Decentralized storage of
data means that several servers are always online, making it more difficult to
alter data.
Another objective is to prepare for a link with smart contracts, so that real es-
tate could be sold online without the help of notaries, as ownership could be veri-
fied on the blockchain. Governments would still take responsibility for the infor-
mation, including information about zoning and restrictions on sales. The goal is
thus not to purge governments from transactions but rather to make government
services more efficient and more trustworthy.
In these applications, the registry can be updated by a limited, selected num-
ber of servers (a permissioned approach). There is no need to let an undeter-
mined number of miners compete for the updates. There is, however, a need for
full transparency. Not everyone should be able to write on the system, but every-
one should be able to read the registry. The reading provides the actual service
and is also a mechanism for double-checking the veracity of the information.
Another government application could be public procurement. The central
government could issue a token backed by the national currency. Each ministry
or municipality could be issued an address and allocated tokens as part of the
budget process. They would use the tokens to pay contractors for public pur-
chases; contractors would redeem their tokens with the central government. This
mechanism would make all purchases not only fully transparent but also in-
stantly auditable by anyone, reducing graft. Social protection transfers could
benefit from a similar set-up, although privacy concerns would have to be
addressed.
Large companies are also exploring blockchain applications. Companies need
to be online all the time, for internal communications and communications with
clients. One central server is not reliable in this respect; a system that provides a
common view of information through communication between independent
servers is superior to a central server. Decentralized information is also more dif-
ficult to alter through hacks, because hackers would have to break into more than
one server.
Companies are experimenting with different versions of the blockchain proto-
col to transition toward a more decentralized information strategy. Experiments
are moving toward permissioned systems, with a preselected number of servers
maintaining the decentralized database. Decentralizing reduces the probability
that participating servers become malicious, makes it easier to secure them, and
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 37
prevents the costly competition that is needed in a permission-less system. The
decentralized consensus problem is easier to solve than in the original bitcoin
application. However, with a small number of servers, data systems other than
blockchain could be used. The advantages of a permissioned system may be the
reason why there are no large-scale blockchain applications yet in these compa-
nies, despite the many experiments.
Blockchain technology could also be used to manage vast and diverse data
systems, such as health records, that are too complicated for a central server. They
could benefit from decentralized servers that communicate with one another and
always reflect the latest update of treatments and test results. The existence of
secure, decentralized digital health records could significantly increase the effi-
ciency of the health care industry.
The main challenge for these kinds of data systems is privacy. Both reading
and writing of health records should be limited. This requires adjustments to the
original blockchain design, which is public, in the sense that everyone can read
it. A health record application would be private, with secure encryption to protect
confidentiality of medical information.
These examples show the broad range of potential applications of blockchain.
They also suggest that many of them could be very different from the original
blockchain design. Instead of a public database, with an unlimited number of
participants that maintain the blockchain and an independent cryptocurrency to
be used in transactions, the most successful future applications could work with
private information, a limited number of permissioned servers, and a token
linked to legal tender for transactions.
The most important components of those future applications could become
the cryptography behind personal IDs, the time stamps that make data irrevers-
ible, and the open source character of the platform. These applications would not
eliminate trusted intermediaries, they would make more competition between
intermediaries possible. Digital platforms like Facebook, Uber, Airbnb, and Ama-
zon use proprietary software and organize their own user IDs; the veracity of
their data is not protected through decentralized storage. All these platforms can
gain natural monopoly power because of network effects, because the platforms
become more useful and more powerful if more people participate. A standardize
system of digital IDs and open-source networks could break that monopoly and
increase entry opportunities. Experiments with P2P digital interactions are very
important for this reason. Even if current applications do not stand the test of
time, the ultimate result could well be transformational.
Blockchain applications in Europe and Central Asia
Many countries in ECA have provided fertile ground for cryptocurrencies and
blockchain technologies, especially since late 2016. When cryptocurrencies
emerged, almost 10 years ago, activities were small-scale. As everywhere else in
the world, early transactions were used largely for gambling or for the purchase
illegal products on the dark web (figure 2.5).11
38 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
FIGURE 2.5 Early use of bitcoin was clustered around gambling and the dark web
Source: blockchain.info.
Note: Each link (“edge”) in the figure represents a bitcoin transfer between nodes. The size of the nodes represents the total inflows of funds (one
entity can have multiple addresses).
The use of cryptocurrencies intensified at the end of 2016, especially for large
cross-border transfers. When the prices of cryptocurrencies skyrocketed in 2017,
investments in mining capacity increased sharply and people began investing in
cryptocurrencies in the hope of benefitting from further price rises.
Investments in blockchain technologies surged. Governments in many ECA
countries began experimenting with blockchain to improve their services. Some
central banks are studying the issuance of legal tender in the form of digital cur-
rency, and financial institutions are piloting blockchain applications to incorpo-
rate them in the existing financial architecture.
ECA has become an important center for ICOs. In terms of the number of
projects, the Russian Federation ranks third globally (with 8.8 percent of all proj-
ects), Switzerland fifth (6.9 percent), Estonia seventh (3.0 percent), and Lithuania
eighth (2.8 percent) (figure 2.5). This section examines the reasons for the strong
interest in blockchain technologies in ECA, based on anecdotal evidence.
Blockchain technologies, which place a heavy emphasis on making financial
intermediaries redundant, are particularly attractive in countries where trust in
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 39
financial institutions is lacking, people want to avoid oversight, and/or financial
sectors are underdeveloped (Aris 2017). Countries where corruption and political
instability are higher, confidence in the rule of law is lower, and regulatory qual-
ity is lower tend to adopt bitcoin more rapidly (all four correlations shown in
figure 2.6 are statistically significant).
A prime example is Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela, where people seek
alternatives for the bolivar, the value of which been eroded by hyperinflation.
Such extreme examples of hyperinflation no longer exist in ECA. Nevertheless,
some anecdotal evidence suggests that weak institutions or vulnerable banks are
one reason behind the interest in cryptocurrencies.12 Financial dollarization
remains substantial in the eastern part of the region, reflecting lack of trust in
FIGURE 2.6 Adoption of bitcoin is negatively correlated with the quality of institutions
9
MAR
8
NGA
7 VEN PAK TZA
6
5 RUS MYS
4 IR UN KRKIE CDN HN NTINHDAZAF POL HKG HRV JPN
23 ARM G PDE CHX O OLB M LRARSOAMU
HUN
CHLUSSA CG CN ANP
H
NZ
O
EL
R
1 VNM CZE GBR
0
–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3
c. Political stability d. Control of corruption
9 9
MAR MAR
8 8
NGA NGA
7 PAK VEN TZA 7 VEN PAKTZA
6 6
5 RUS IDN MYS 5 RUS IDN MYS
4 KEN THA CHNPER ZAF HKG 4 KEN IRNP TE HR CAHNZAF HKG
123 UKR TUR CIN P OD H LM LEXSAU BRA A VR R NDO G MOM GCM BHUH RLS HR AP UVO
N
CL AJ S ZUP W ESN N CEO AS
C
NRG HNP EZL 123 U BK DRR M A OE MX PAI VHN R
C
NLD G OS MTA LUU RROM HH UR
N
CV ZEPOL AR CUE HS LAJP GN
BA
RC UA
SS NCG HN DP N EO NZ KRL
0 0
–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 –2 –1 0 1 2 3
Index value Index value
)srallod
,tnecrep(
htworg
emulov
nioctib
ylkeeW
)srallod
,tnecrep(
htworg
emulov
nioctib
ylkeeW
)srallod
,tnecrep(
htworg
emulov
nioctib
ylkeeW
)srallod
,tnecrep(
htworg
emulov
nioctib
ylkeeW
a. Rule of law b. Regulatory quality
9
MAR
8
NGA
7 VEN PAKTZA
6
5 RUS MYS
4 IRN INK C DE HIDN NN TZ HA AP FER POL HKG UKR HRV ARE JPN
3 ARG B DRS OAA MU TURROM USA NZLSGP
2 PHL COLHUN CHLN CO C AHR NE
1 VNM CZE GBR
0
–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3
Index value Index value
Source: World Development Indicators and localbitcoins.com.
Note: As bitcoin is traded on a global network, it is difficult to determine the geographic origin and destination of transactions. This analysis uses
the currency denomination on a popular P2P bitcoin exchange (localbitcoins.com). The vertical axis shows the speed of adoption of bitcoin, mea-
sured by the average weekly growth of the volume of bitcoins exchanged on this exchange. The institutional variables are sourced from the World
Bank’s Governance Indicators database.
40 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
existing legal tender. It has resulted in much lower savings at banks than in other
parts of the world (Gould and Melecky 2017). Households are looking for alter-
native saving options.
Another reason for the use of blockchain technologies in ECA is the desire to
develop alternative means of transferring large funds. Russia is the largest issuer
(more than $956 million)—followed by the United States ($811 million) and Swit-
zerland ($514 million)—because of the $850 million raised for the TON block-
chain.13 One of the goals of that ambitious project is to provide an alternative to
the SWIFT international interbank payment system (Aris 2017). Russia also has
the largest number of users of the digital wallet on blockchain.com (UNDP 2018).
Despite these examples, it is doubtful that ICOs will have a broader application
as venture capital if security is not built in for investors.
Established financial centers are striving to adjust to meet the competition
from a disruptive technology like blockchain. Switzerland is leading in adjusting
financial regulations to cover ICOs, ensuring that they are incorporated into the
existing financial architecture rather than developed as an outside alternative
(see Atkins 2018a, 2018b; Financial Times 2018). Its aims to become a cryptocur-
rency and blockchain hub is reflected in its vibrant ICO activities. For example,
Sirin Labs raised $157 million for the development of a blockchain-based smart-
phone. In line with these developments, a Swiss foundation, advised by Jacob
Frenkel, chairman of JPMorgan Chase International, and Nobel laureate Myron
Scholes, raised $50 million to develop a cryptocurrency backed by Special Draw-
ing Rights (SDRs). Saga would have a stable value and be integrated into the
existing financial sector, including anti-money-laundering checks, with deposits
in the International Monetary Fund’s SDR holdings. France is also planning a
regulatory framework for ICOs (Aris 2017).
Governments in ECA are accumulating in-house experience with blockchain
pilots to improve government services. Estonia, Georgia, and Ukraine have ex-
perimented with blockchain to set up land and real estate registries. They are still
searching for more specialized and more efficient designs, but the experiments
have given a boost to efforts to digitize government services.
Some government banks in ECA are seeking to improve their services through
the use of blockchain technologies. The Russian state-owned VEB bank is pilot-
ing a new blockchain-based payment system with the regional government of
Kaliningrad (Milano 2018). Another state-owned bank, Sberbank, is partnering
with Russia’s federal anti-monopoly service to use blockchain technologies to
store and transfer documents.
Official bodies in ECA are investing in blockchain research to improve ser-
vices. The European Commission has funded a blockchain observatory to en-
courage blockchain technologies and help formulate policy recommendations,
especially for smart contracts and the improvement of government services
(Young 2017; Nicholson 2018). Lithuania has opened a blockchain center to incu-
bate start-ups, partnering with similar centers in Melbourne and Shanghai (Med-
iTelegraph 2017). Separately, the central bank of Lithuania offers a one-year sand-
box environment for start-ups that develop new digital financial technologies.
Estonia is exploring opportunities to use blockchain technologies in medicine
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 41
(https://e-estonia.com/).Georgia is investigating the possibility of supporting
smart contracts. Serbia and Tajikistan are experimenting with remittances on
blockchain, in cooperation with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP 2018). Azerbaijan is experimenting with digital IDs for banking using
blockchain (SputnikInternational 2018). The Swedish central bank is considering
launching its own digital currency (Aris 2017).
Small ECA countries with a supportive business climate and the absence of
legacy financial instruments are well placed to introduce new financial instru-
ments based on blockchain technologies. Tokenization and ICOs enable small
start-ups, which lack easy access to finance, to raise funds in global markets.
Dynamic start-ups in the Baltic countries and several other small countries, in-
cluding Georgia, have issued ICOs (figure 2.7). These examples are instructive for
other economies in the region that have long been dominated by state-owned
enterprises and have grown primarily through the nontradable sectors. For many
of those economies, the challenge is to unleash new growth potential in
FIGURE 2.7 Europe and
Central Asia is the site a. Estimated share of ICO projects
of many initial coin Share
offerings (ICOs) 18.07%
.20%
b. Estimated funds raised in ICOs
Amount raised
$956,174,361
$110,000
Source: Websites for ICO listings (icowatchlist.com, icobench.com, and tokenreport.com).
42 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
internationally competitive sectors. The new P2P technologies provide a gateway
to these markets. More specifically, activities on and contributions to blockchain
networks are automatically exposed to international competition.
Seemingly more than in other parts of the world, governments in ECA are
restraining natural monopolies of tech giants. People in the region show strong
privacy concerns when data become proprietary and are captured by tech com-
panies. The open character of the blockchain architecture could break the mo-
nopoly on data. Several governments and the European Commission are looking
at the possibility of using the new technologies to reduce the power of large digi-
tal network companies.
The anecdotal evidence presented here suggests that there may be multiple
explanations for the blockchain activities in Europe and Central Asia:
• In the eastern part of the region, market-based financial sectors are relatively
new and have not fully matured. Insurance and capital markets are underde-
veloped. Land registration and cadasters of real estate can still be improved.
Blockchain technologies could help fill these gaps.
• Vulnerabilities in the banking sectors after the transition in 1991, the global
financial crisis in 2008, and the plunge in oil prices in 2014 have eroded trust
in financial institutions. In the eastern part of the region, bank deposits are
exceptionally low, and consumers are looking for alternative ways to invest
their savings (Gould and Melecky 2017)
• Throughout the region, banks dominate financial sectors. Venture capital that
does not require collateral is scarce. New forms of fund raising could help tech
start-ups that have a potential to grow quickly in competitive global markets.
• Demand for new ways of making cross-border transfers is strong. Remittanc-
es are large in the region; the high transactions costs associated with them is
onerous. The region also has a large share of illicit financial flows, linked to
money laundering, tax evasion, and the circumventing of capital controls or
sanctions.
• Governments in the region provide a broad range of services. They oversee
elaborate social security systems, and most of them play an integrating role in
health care, pensions, and education. There is continuous demand to make
these services more efficient and more transparent. Many governments are
experimenting with blockchain technologies to achieve those goals.
• Governments in the region are looking for ways to break the power of large
tech companies and increase privacy.
It is unclear which experiments will have a lasting impact. The transforma-
tional impact may come from applications that are very different from the origi-
nal blockchain design. The blockchain experiment has already boosted innova-
tion and competition, in both the private sector and government. For that reason
alone, blockchain experiments deserve support.
ECA is active in the mining of cryptocurrencies. Georgia is home to one of the
largest mining companies of the world (Bitfury) as well as many smaller miners
(box 2.3). Bitfury, which is building additional facilities in Canada, Iceland, and
Norway, controls about 10–15 percent of global mining.
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 43
BOX 2.3 Cryptocurrency mining and the demand for electricity in Georgia
Mining of cryptocurrencies is surprisingly wide- FIGURE B2.3.1 Georgia had the fastest-growing
spread in Georgia, thanks to tax exemptions and electricity consumption in Europe and
Central Asia in 2010–14
low electricity prices. Indeed, Georgia has had the
fastest-growing electricity consumption per capita Tajikistan
Cyprus
in all of ECA since 2009 (box figure 2.3.1). Moldova
This process was jumpstarted when Bitfury, one Greece
United Kingdom
of the world’s largest bitcoin miners, built a 20MW Electricity consumption Montenegro
data center in Gori and a 40MW mining facility in annual growth 2000–09 Italy
Tbilisi, with funding from the Georgian Co-Invest- Electricity consumption Switzerland
Denmark
ment Fund. The Tbilisi facility, located in a free annual growth 2010–14
France
industrial zone, has daily revenue of $250,000– Spain
$400,000. Bitfury recently sold this facility to its Sweden
Ireland
Chinese partner, Asian Chong Sing Holdings. It Portugal
is now building mobile data centers to be sold to Norway
Luxembourg
other investors. Other companies have built mining
Belgium
facilities in free industrial zones in Kutaisi. Netherlands
Many households have joined mining pools. Finland
Croatia
Surveys indicate that up to 5 percent of house-
Uzbekistan
holds in Georgia are engaged in cryptocurrency Serbia
Czech Republic
mining or investments.
Macedonia, FYR
These mining activities have had a striking Germany
impact on electricity consumption, turning Geor- Slovak Republic
Iceland
gia from a net exporter to a net importer of elec-
Bulgaria
tricity. Estimates of the share of Georgia’s elec- Hungary
tricity demand devoted to cryptocurrency mining Austria
Lithuania
range from 10 to 15 percent—and the figure could
Ukraine
be even higher, because it is difficult to observe Romania
Russian Federation
small-scale mining activities. Per capita electricity
Slovenia
consumption in Georgia was 3,343 KWh in 2016, Poland
almost three times higher than in countries with Belarus
Estonia
similar levels of per capita income. Even after cor-
Malta
recting for historically high electricity consump- Turkmenistan
tion in Georgia (likely because of the availability Latvia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
of inexpensive hydropower), energy use in recent
Armenia
years is remarkable. Between 2014 and 2016, per Turkey
Albania
capita energy consumption increased by 655
Kazakhstan
KWh, of which only 65 KWh can be explained by Azerbaijan
rises in income. Some 590 KWh, or 18 percent of Kyrgyz Republic
Georgia
total demand, remains unexplained. Even before
2015—actually, since the start of bitcoin, in 2009— 10 8 6 4 2 0 –2 –4 –6 –8
Growth per capita (percent)
the unexplained part of electricity demand was ris-
ing (box figure 2.3.2). Source: World Development Indicators and the International
Energy Agency.
(Continued next page)
44 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
BOX 2.3 (continued)
FIGURE B2.3.2 Unexplained electricity demand in Georgia has risen rapidly since 2009
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Of course, the mining of cryptocurrencies also It would be interesting to see how the financing
raises incomes. Mining revenues in Georgia could of these activities shows up in the balance of pay-
well contribute several percentage points to GDP, ments. Revenues in cryptocurrencies are likely
exchanged into legal tender at exchanges abroad,
even if these revenues are not registered as part
after which part of the legal tender is transferred
of GDP (if they were registered, they would prob-
back to Georgia.
ably be classified as exports). What is observable is
Investment opportunities in mining cryptocur-
the additional consumption and imports not only
rencies likely attract foreign direct investment. It is
of electricity and computer parts but also of more
too early to draw conclusions about the spillovers
general consumption financed by the mining reve- to other sectors of the economy. It may trigger
nues. This increase is similar to the increase in con- other innovative activities, or it could crowd out
sumption as a result of large inflows of remittances. investments in other activities.
Cryptocurrency mining is also booming in Iceland (Perper 2018), which is on
track to use more electricity for mining than it uses to power all of its residences.
Armenia is set to be home to a 50MW mining farm (Murphy and Stafford 2018).
Slush Pool, a bitcoin mining pool with a market share of about 7 percent and
many participants from all over the world, is run by Satoshi Labs, a mining com-
pany based in the Czech Republic. KnCMiner is a mining pool in Sweden. An-
other mining pool is in Russia.
Cryptocurrency mining thrives in a cold climate (avoiding the need for cool-
ing) and in areas where electricity costs are low. En+ Group, a Russian energy
company, is preparing to offer electricity to cryptocurrency miners at five plants
in Siberia (Marson 2017; Helms 2018). The electricity capacity available for min-
ers could well dwarf the capacity of existing mining facilities in ECA. EN+ could
attract Chinese miners, who are currently dominant players in the global market
but find a less and less hospitable environment in China.
atipac
rep
hwK
Annual residual consumption of electricity Average residual consumption 2000–09
Source: Data for 2000–14 are from World Development Indicators and the International Energy Agency.
Data for 2015 and 2016 are from Georgia’s energy services company.
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 45
These mining activities illustrate the dynamic response to new opportunities
by entrepreneurs in the region. They bode well for the development of other ap-
plications of these technologies. But the heavy electricity use by companies that
compete for the right to mine cryptocurrencies is a growing problem. How to
accommodate and mitigate growing electricity demand from cryptocurrency
miners and prepare for future declines in demand if mining activities relocate or
mining stops altogether in its current form are the most urgent challenges as
these markets develop.
There are multiple approaches to meeting these challenges. The cryptocur-
rency community is looking for more efficient ways to update the blockchain.
Governments are reconsidering their tariff policies; in order to curtail energy use,
they need to raise electricity tariffs for miners or create more market-based mech-
anisms to determine tariffs. If unchecked, electricity use could rise before alterna-
tives are found, possibly resulting in long-term damage to the environment. In
addition, the fiscal costs of investments in power plants (or contingent liabilities,
where new power plants are developed in partnership with the private sector)
could threaten public finances if demand for electricity driven by cryptocurren-
cies collapses.
Policy challenges
Cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies pose difficult challenges for pol-
icy makers. There is no regulatory framework for transfers made with cryptocur-
rencies or smart contracts. Transfers occur outside anti-money-laundering com-
pliance programs, and smart contracts are not subject to consumer protection
laws or financial oversight.
Tax codes do not fully cover the new markets if cryptocurrencies are not rec-
ognized in the law as payment systems but are instead viewed as commodities.
It is difficult to determine the geographic location of the value added created by
cryptocurrency mining. Tax legislation therefore has to be adjusted to incorporate
these new activities into direct and indirect tax systems.
Another ambiguity for policy makers is whether these new activities should
be supported or constrained. Should they be encouraged because of positive ex-
ternalities and first-mover benefits? Or should they be constrained, because they
crowd out investments with greater social return?
Another pertinent question for policy makers is whether and how they can
use these technologies to improve their own services.
It is too early to offer specific advice, because there is still great uncertainty
about the future of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies. But experi-
ences with other digital technologies—such as e-commerce, digital platforms,
and the sharing economy—suggest that the following general guidelines should
be followed.
• Give the new technologies space, and avoid imposing restrictive legislation before
initial ambiguities are resolved. Even if these technologies are ultimately unsuc-
cessful, the experiments can help develop entrepreneurial skills, put competi-
tive pressure on more traditional activities, and trigger innovations in other
46 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
sectors. A dynamic business climate should encourage innovations, experi-
ments, and risk taking.
• Make implicit subsidies explicit, and be clear about risks. If activities are not yet
covered by the tax code or are undertaken in special economic zones, the im-
plicit subsidy and its temporary nature should be calculated and made public.
Consumers should be warned about risks, such as the risks associated with
volatile cryptocurrencies.
• Start planning for leveling the playing field. If these technologies become success-
ful, they should be integrated into the formal economy. Tax codes and regula-
tions should be adjusted, so that both old and new technologies operate on a
level playing field.14
• Innovate as government. The corporate motto “think big, start small, quit soon,
and scale fast” is relevant for governments, too. Blockchain technologies pro-
vide a stimulus to further digitize government services. Most successful gov-
ernments are bold in their ideas, know when to terminate experiments that are
not successful, and have the professionalism to quickly scale small experi-
ments that are promising.
An undesirable side effect of the cryptocurrencies is the outsized use of elec-
tricity in mining. If mining companies pay a lower electricity price than the mar-
ginal cost of supplying more electricity, governments should consider raising
tariffs or at least calculating the implicit subsidy. The sharp increase in electricity
demand might be an opportunity to develop an electricity market with intra-day
price fluctuations, so that price differentiation reflects actual costs. Uncertainty
about future electricity demand for cryptocurrency mining warrants a rethinking
of contingent liabilities of governments where additional power plants are built
by public-private partnerships. Guarantees related to future demand for electric-
ity used in cryptocurrency mining are riskier than for other electricity demand.
At some point, electricity tariffs for mining could be used as indirect taxation of
the value added created by miners. Although it is difficult to determine the geo-
graphic location of the output of these activities, it is easy to locate the inputs.
Ultimately, financial oversight will cover cryptocurrencies and smart con-
tracts. This process will be a gradual one of trial and error, and it will depend on
the direction in which blockchain applications develop. First steps have already
been taken, in the United States (where bitcoin can be traded on futures markets),
in Switzerland (where regulation of ICOs was proposed), and in the Netherlands
(where guidance was provided about the tax treatment of cryptocurrency hold-
ings). Oversight to prevent money laundering, tax evasion, pump-and-dump
schemes, and illicit cross-border transfers focuses on transactions in which cryp-
tocurrencies are exchanged for legal tender.15 At some point, this oversight could
extend to miners and other companies that update the blockchain. The ultimate
goal of all these efforts is to create a level playing field, so that blockchain applica-
tion can be integrated into existing markets. The long-term outcome could be that
supervision becomes much more effective, because the transparency of the block-
chain could provide supervisors and courts with access to real-time information.
This access would also make it easier to develop valuable early-warning systems.
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 47
The many experiments and brainstorms by governments and central banks
throughout the region are inspiring. Just as blockchain opportunities put com-
petitive pressure on private financial sectors, they also trigger creative thinking
in governments. It is important that these experiments not consider current
blockchain designs as the full universe of possibilities. Even if decentralized
maintenance of digital government data can have major advantages, a permis-
sioned system seems much more appropriate and efficient for governments than
the original system that maintains the blockchain for cryptocurrencies. The ulti-
mate conclusion might even be that other data systems are better suited for spe-
cific applications than blockchain technologies, including in the creation of digi-
tal currencies by central banks (box 2.4). The flurry of experiments shows the
success of the blockchain revolution, but it also illustrates that progress may
come from innovations that are quite different from the original design and objec-
tive of the blockchain protocol.
BOX 2.4 Will central banks issue digital currencies?
Central banks are exploring the possibility of issu- The Swedish central bank is exploring the pos-
ing digital money, for several reasons. First, the sibility of making electronic accounts and value
use of traditional cash is steadily declining (Rogoff cards directly available to the public. The idea is to
2014). Second, cryptocurrencies have provided a administer this digital money in a central register at
working digital alternative to cash, replicating the the central bank. This proposal to replicate instru-
original characteristics of cash in digital format. ments that already exist in the private sector stems
Like cash, cryptocurrencies allow anonymous P2P from the understanding that the government has
transactions without involvement of middlemen. the legal obligation to provide means of payment
Third, demand for tokens that are linked to legal to the public. It could, however, undercut the tra-
tender is increasing. These tokens could be used in ditional financial intermediation role of commercial
the same way as cryptocurrencies but without the banks, which transform liquid liabilities into long-
drawback of high volatility in their value. It seems a term assets. A central bank cannot take over the
natural development to transform actual coins and role of pooling liquidity to finance investments.
banknotes into digital tokens with the same legal If a central bank chose blockchain technolo-
protection and subject to the same price stabili- gies to administer digital transactions in a decen-
zation as all money issued by central banks.a The tralized way, it would compete more directly with
transparency of transactions with central bank digi- cryptocurrencies, with the advantage of providing
tal currencies could facilitate the systematic con- a token with a more stable value. Still, the system
duct of monetary policy (Bordo and Levin 2017). would differ fundamentally from the early crypto-
There are serious concerns about the issuance currency protocols. Supply of central bank coins
of digital money by central banks. Digital tokens would be endogenous—in order to link their value
issued by central banks could potentially replace to legal tender—and seigniorage would accrue to
not only cash but also electronic payment systems the central bank. Such a system would undoubt-
operated by commercial banks, which already offer edly become a permissioned blockchain, with only
electronic accounts, mobile money, and value cards. preselected servers participating (Danezis and
These systems can be uploaded and used offline. Meiklejohn 2016).
a. Bech and Garratt (2017) provides a comprehensive overview of the differences between central bank digital currencies and
cryptocurrencies.
48 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
Notes
1. Electronic accounts are much more popular than cash. Central banks do provide elec-
tronic accounts to banks; they do not yet provide digital cash or electronic accounts di-
rectly to the public.
2. The public key functions as a pseudonym in communications. The private key is used
to prove one’s identity. If this digital ID becomes a standard on open-source platforms, it
could make IDs and passwords on proprietary platforms like Facebook or Google redun-
dant.
3. See, for example, the Georgian start-up Golden Fleece (https://goldenfleece.co/).
4. Clark (2017) describes the early history of digital payment systems.
5. A bitcoin address is an identifier of 26–35 alphanumeric characters that are equivalent to
unique IDs. Every transaction is recorded on the public blockchain, so anyone can view
each address involved in each transaction. However, it is difficult to know the real iden-
tity of the people involved in the transactions. For this reason, the bitcoin network is of-
ten described as being pseudo-anonymous rather than completely anonymous.
6. In the bitcoin protocol, a block can contain about 2,000 new transactions.
7. The block rewards are hard-coded, but there is no guidance on what the fee should be.
As miners have discretion over which transactions to include, they select the transactions
with the highest fees. As the size of each block on the blockchain is limited to 1 MB
(roughly 2,000 transactions), if a user wants her transaction to be included in the next
block, she has to offer a high enough fee so that her transaction is among the approxi-
mately 2,000 that are selected.
8. Other new concepts, often variations of the proof of stake, are proof of activity, proof of
burn, proof of capacity, and proof of elapsed time (Rooney 2018).
9. The Austrian school and Keynesian economists have long debated the pros and cons of
private, decentralized money versus government-sanctioned legal tender. What is an
attraction for one group of economists (no reliance on governments, which are inclined
to impose an inflation tax) is a nightmare for the other (financial instability, lack of mon-
etary instruments).
10. ZeroCash (http://zerocash-project.org/) is a good example of a platform that provides
more encryption.
11. Silk Road, an online market for illegal drugs that used bitcoins, started in 2011. The FBI
took it down in 2014.
12. The vulnerability of banks in oil-exporting countries after the fall in oil prices was one
of the reasons for the formation of the Blockchain and Cryptocurrency Association
(Dyussembekova 2017).
13. This project is spearheaded by Pavel Durov, one of the founders of the Russian social
media platform Vkontakte, and the encrypted messaging app Telegram (Khrennikov
and Voitova 2018).
14. Carstens (2018) strongly advocates this point.
15. Levin, O’Brien, and Zuberi (2015) discusses the regulation of cryptocurrencies. Bal
(2015) discusses tax issues. He and others (2016) provide a comprehensive overview of
all oversight measures.
Chapter 2: Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain: Hype or Transformational Technologies? ● 49
References
Aris, Ben. 2017. “Russia’s Blockchain Revolution.” Moscow Times, October 6. https://
themoscowtimes.com/articles/eastern-europes-blockchain-revolution-59179.
Atkins, Ralph. 2018a. “Swiss Authorities Tread Wary Path through CryptoValley.” Financial
Times, March 20. https://www.ft.com/content/bea458ba-25fc-11e8-b27e-cc62a39d57a0.
———. 2018b. “Switzerland’s Stock Exchange Chairman Calls for ‘e-Franc.’” Financial
Times. February 25. https://www.ft.com/content/fcc7d27a-186e-11e8-9376-4a6390addb44.
Bal, Aleksandra. 2015. “How to Tax Bitcoin.” In Handbook of Digital Currency: Bitcoin,
Innovation, Financial Instruments, and Big Data, ed. David Lee Kuo Chuen. Cambridge,
MA: Academic Press.
Bech, Morten Linnemann, and Rodney Garratt. 2017. “Central Bank Cryptocurrencies.”
September 17. Bank for International Settlements, Basel. https://www.bis.org/publ/
qtrpdf/r_qt1709f.htm.
Bordo, Michael D., and Andrew T. Levin. 2017. “Central Bank Digital Currency and the
Future of Monetary Policy.” NBER Working Paper 23711. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w23711.
Carstens, Agustin. 2018. “Money in the Digital Age: What Role for Central Banks?” Lecture
by the general manager of the Bank for International Settlements, House of Finance,
Goethe University, Frankfurt, February 6. https://www.bis.org/speeches/sp180206.htm.
Castor, Amy. 2017. “A (Short) Guide to Blockchain Consensus Protocols.” CoinDesk. May
17. https://www.coindesk.com/short-guide-blockchain-consensus-protocols/.
Clark, Jeremy. 2017. “The Long Road to Bitcoin.” Foreword to “Distributed Ledger Technology
(DLT) and Blockchain,” Harish Natarajan, Solvej Karla Krause, and Helen Luskin Gradstein,
World Bank, FinTech Note No. 1, Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/177911513714062215/Distributed-Ledger-Technology-DLT-and-blockchain.
Danezis, George, and Sarah Meiklejohn. 2016. “Centrally Banked Cryptocurrencies.”
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1505.06895.pdf.
Digiconomist. n.d. Bitcoin Energy Consumption Index. https://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-
energy-consumption.
Dyussembekova, Zhazira. 2017. “Kazakh Organizations form Blockchain and Cryptocurrency
Association.” Astana Times, November 23. https://astanatimes.com/2017/11/kazakh-
organisations-form-blockchain-and-cryptocurrency-association/.
Financial Times. 2018. “Bringing Swiss Order to Initial Coin Offerings.” February 19.
https://www.ft.com/content/36ef310c-1566-11e8-9e9c-25c814761640.
Gould, David Michael, and Martin Melecky. 2017. “Risks and Returns: Managing Financial
Trade-Offs for Inclusive Growth in Europe and Central Asia.” World Bank, Washington,
DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/25494.
He, Dong, Karl Habermeier, Ross Leckow, Vikram Haksar, Yasmina, Almeida, Mikari
Kashima, Nadim Kyriakos-Saad, Hiroko Oura, Tahsin Saadi Sedik, Natalia Stetsenko,
and Concepcion Verdugo-Yepes. 2016. “Virtual Currencies and Beyond: Initial
Considerations.” IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/16/03, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2016/sdn1603.pdf.
Helms, Kevin. 2018. “Five Siberian Power Plants Attracting Crypto Miners with Surplus
Electricity.” February 15. https://news.bitcoin.com/five-siberian-power-plants-attracting-
cryptocurrency-miners-surplus-electricity/.
Levin, Richard B., Aaron A. O’Brien, and Madina M. Zuberi. 2015. “Real Regulation of
Virtual Currencies.” In Handbook of Digital Currency: Bitcoin, Innovation, Financial
Instruments, and Big Data, ed. David Lee Kuo Chuen. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
50 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
Johnson, S. 2018. “Beyond the Bitcoin Bubble.” New York Times, January 16. https://www.
nytimes.com/2018/01/16/magazine/beyond-the-bitcoin-bubble.html.
Khrennikov, Ilya, and Olga Voitova, 2018. “Telegram Triples Price in Largest Initial Coin
Offering.” Bloomberg Technology, February 28. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2018-02-28/telegram-said-to-triple-price-in-largest-initial-coin-offering.
Krugman, Paul. 2013. “Bitcoin Is Evil.” New York Times, December 28. https://krugman.
blogs.nytimes.com/2013/12/28/bitcoin-is-evil/.
Marson, James. 2017. “Frigid, Industrial Siberia: Primed for the Digital Era.” September 3.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/frigid-industrial-siberia-primed-for-the-digital-
era-1504436400.
MediTelegraph. 2017. “Lithuania Emerges as Blockchain Gateway to Europe.” December 5.
http://www.themeditelegraph.com/en/green-and-tech/technology/2017/12/05/
lithuania-emerges-blockchain-gateway-europe-YVX3gnWsH60lH36eLrU3qL/index.
html.
Milano, Annaliese. 2018. “Regional Government in Russia to Test Blockchain Payments.”
Coindesk, February 20. https://www.coindesk.com/regional-government-russia-test-
blockchain-payments/.
Murphy, Hannah, and Philip Stafford. 2018. “Blockchain Explainer: A Revolution Only in
Its Infancy.” Financial Times, February 1. https://www.ft.com/content/6c707162-ffb1-
11e7-9650-9c0ad2d7c5b5.
Nakamoto, Satoshi. 2008. “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.” https://bitcoin.
org/bitcoin.pdf.
Nicholson, Sibel. 2018. “EU Opens Blockchain Observatory, Looking to Invest up to €340
Million.” Interesting Engineering, February 2. https://interestingengineering.com/eu-
opens-blockchain-observatory-looking-to-invest-up-to-340-million.
Perper, Rosie. 2018. “Iceland May Use More Electricity Mining Bitcoin than Powering
Homes This Year.” BusinessInsider, February 12. http://www.businessinsider.com/
iceland-bitcoin-mines-are-booming-2018-2.
Poon, Joseph, and Thaddeus Dryja. 2016 “The Bitcoin Lightning Network: Scalable Off-
Chain Instant Payments.” Lightning Network, January 14. https://lightning.network/
lightning-network-paper.pdf.
Popper, Nathaniel. 2018. “As Bitcoin Bubble Loses Air, Frauds and Flaws Rise to Surface.”
New York Times, February 5. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/05/technology/virtual-
currency-regulation.html.
Rogoff, Kenneth. 2014. “Costs and Benefits to Phasing Out Paper Currency.” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 29. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c13431.
Rooney, Kate. 2018. “Peter Thiel Is Betting on Bitcoin Because One Cryptocurrency Will Become
the ‘Online Equivalent to Gold.’” CNBC, March 15. https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/15/
peter-thiel-is-betting-on-bitcoin-to-be-the-online-equivalent-to-gold.html.
SputnikInternational. 2018. “Cryptocurrency Boom: Armenia Set to Be Home to 50 MW
Mining Farm.” February 7. https://sputniknews.com/business/201802071061451274-
cryptocurrency-boom-armenia-mining-farm/.
Truman, Edwin M. 2013. “Asian and European Financial Crises Compared.” WP13-9,
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC. https://piie.com/
publications/wp/wp13-9.pdf.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2018. The Future Is Decentralised: Block
Chains, Distributed Ledgers, & The Future of Sustainable Development. New York. https://
www.blockchain.com/assets/pdf/TheFutureisDecentralised.pdf.
Young, Joseph. 2017. “Why the EU Is Investing $540,000 in Blockchain Development and
Pilot Test.” BTCmanager.com, May 1. https://btcmanager.com/why-eu-is-investing-
540000-in-blockchain-development-and-pilot-test/.
II
PART
Selected Country Pages
Selected Country Pages ● 53
pick up. The poverty rate (measured as
Recent developments US$ 5.5/day, 2011 PPP) is estimated to
ALBANIA have decreased in 2017 to 32.8 percent,
compared to 33.9 percent in 2016. Labor
Albania’s real GDP grew by 3.8 percent force participation of women, particularly
in 2017, up from 3.4 percent in 2016. Key young women, has started to decline
Table 1 2017 drivers were private investment and con- throughout 2017, a trend that needs to be
Population, million 2.9 sumption. Investment dynamics reflected closely monitored to avoid reversing pre-
GDP, current US$ billion 12.5 two large energy projects financed by vious gains.
GDP per capita, current US$ 4297 FDI (the Trans -Adriatic Pipeline and a Fiscal policy supported a reduction of
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 0.9 hydropower plant). Private consumption public debt, but the pace of fiscal consoli-
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 6.6 was supported by a recovery in employ- dation slowed in 2017. The 2017 fiscal defi-
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 34.7 ment, wages and credit. Public consump- cit is estimated at 2 percent of GDP, slight-
tion made a small contribution to ly above the deficit of 1.8 percent in 2016.
Gini coefficienta 32.1 growth, reflecting growth of the public- Revenue gains, from increased economic
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 113.7 sector wages. High tourism exports and activity and the recovery of commodity
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 78.2 recovering commodity exports more than prices, were estimated at an additional 0.9
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. compensated for the high investment- percent of GDP in comparison to 2016. On
Notes: related imports of machineries and the expenditure side, under-execution of
(a) Most recent value (2012), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). equipment as well as for the drought- public investments and lower interest
related energy imports. expenditures partially compensated
Growth stimulated job creation. Employ- drought-related emergency support to the
ment grew by 2.9 percent in the first three electricity sector and higher local govern-
Growth is estimated to have strengthened quarters of 2017, following a strong ex- ments spending. Prudent fiscal policy
at 3.8 percent in 2017 supported by in- pansion of 6.5 percent in 2016. Labor force supported the public debt decline to 71
vestments and is projected to moderate to participation increased to 58 percent, up percent of GDP in 2017, compared to 72.4
by 0.4 percentage points year-on-year. percent in 2016.
3.6 percent in 2018 as large FDI-financed
Besides improved employment prospects, The Bank of Albania’s (BoA) policy stance
energy projects wind down; growth will the increase in labor force participation continues to be accommodative and credit
be driven by household consumption, and may reflect the Government’s anti- growth recovers. Average inflation picked
a pickup in exports. Growth created jobs, informality campaign – including in- up to 2 percent in 2017, but remained be-
creased audits and higher penalties for low the BoA’s 3 percent target, prompting
contributing to poverty reduction. Public
non-compliance. The unemployment rate no changes in the policy rate, which re-
debt declined in 2017, but the pace of
declined by 1.7 pp to an average of 13.9 mains at 1.25 percent since May 2016. Un-
fiscal consolidation slowed. Fiscal consol- percent in the first three quarters of 2017. derlying price pressures have remained
idation, improvement in spending effi- Real wages in the formal employment subdued, helped by an appreciation of the
ciency, and implementation of structural have started to pick up in 2017 in con- national currency relative to the euro by 1.7
struction, energy, and tourism. percent in 2017. The restructuring of NPLs
reforms remain critical to fostering confi-
Poverty is estimated to have declined as from large borrowers and mandatory write
dence and growth. growth and employment continued to -offs led to a decline in the NPL ratio to 13.2
FIGURE 1 Albania / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Albania / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real private consumption per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
7 60 250000
6
5
50
4 200000
3
2 40
1 150000
0 30
-1
100000
-2 20
-3
-4 50000
-5 10
Q1 -10 Q1 -11 Q1 -12 Q1 -13 Q1 -14 Q1 -15 Q1 -16 Q1 - 17
Net taxes Other services 0 0
Information and communication Trade autorepair and transport 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Construction Manifacturing
Extractives Agriculture International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
GDP Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: Instat, Bank staff calculations. Sources: World Bank. Notes: See Table 2.
MPO 40 Apr 18
54 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
percent of total loans as of December 2017. energy FDI projects winds down and eco- over the medium term, it has also an-
Low interest rates, progress in dealing with nomic activity increases to close to poten- nounced sizable investments financed
NPLs and economic growth stimulated an tial, growth will moderate. Growth will be through public private partnerships
increase of private sector credit issuance by increasingly relying on private consump- (PPPs) to be contracted starting from 2018.
13.5 percent in 2017. tion, supported by improved labor market
The current account deficit widened in conditions, and net exports supported by
2017. The current account deficit is esti- improved foreign demand. Investment Risks and challenges
mated to have widened, reaching 8 per- will continue to support growth, reflecting
cent of GDP in 2017. FDI-related invest- a public investment drive to reduce infra-
ments in the energy sector and drought- structure gaps and private investment, Economic prospects are vulnerable to
related electricity imports increased im- reflecting structural reforms and improve- downside risks. Given high public debt,
ports. Tourism and commodity prices ments in the business climate. Labor mar- the government needs to implement fiscal
increased the value of exports. The result- ket improvements will support private consolidation and strengthen tax compli-
ing financing needs were covered by sig- consumption. Poverty is expected to de- ance to preserve the macro-fiscal stability
nificant FDI inflows. With much of the cline from 31.3 percent in 2018 to 29.5 per- as a foundation for growth. The Govern-
financing coming through FDIs, external cent in 2019. ment needs to strengthen its PPP manage-
debt declined by 2 percentage points Sustained fiscal consolidation and struc- ment framework to contain fiscal risks
reaching 70.4 percent of GDP in 2017. For- tural reforms are expected to gradually from PPPs and to ensure that investment
eign exchange reserves have remained reduce the fiscal deficit to 1.5 percent of is cost-effective. Harnessing growth will
stable, covering 6 ½ months of imports of GDP by 2020, and the debt-to-GDP ratio require progress on structural reforms
goods and services. to 60 percent of GDP by 2022. Under the improving the business climate - includ-
Government medium term fiscal frame- ing judiciary, financial and energy reform
work, fiscal consolidation will continue -, strengthening the skills of its labor force
Outlook until 2021 – lowering expenditures on - and removing barriers to jobs for the
personnel, operational and maintenance, population. Lower than expected growth
social outlays and local governments. On in trading partners and higher global in-
Growth is projected to moderate to 3.6 the revenue side, the introduction of a terest rates are also key risks for Albania’s
percent in 2018, as two large FDI projects newly valued property tax in 2018 is ex- growth and public finances. Reforms
in the energy sector wind down, and then pected to yield additional revenues. While should be informed by equity considera-
average 3.5 percent in the period 2019-20. the government is planning sustained tions to ensure continued poverty reduc-
As the demand stimulus from the large capital expenditures at 5 percent of GDP tion and inclusion.
TABLE 2 Albania / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 2.2 3.4 3.8 3.6 3.5 3.5
Private Consumption 1.1 2.9 1.7 2.7 2.7 3.5
Government Consumption -1.1 3.8 2.3 1.2 0.4 0.6
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 4.0 6.0 6.8 3.5 3.1 1.9
Exports, Goods and Services 1.0 13.0 7.5 6.5 6.5 6.3
Imports, Goods and Services -2.9 7.4 5.7 4.8 4.8 4.9
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.1 3.4 3.7 3.6 3.5 3.5
Agriculture 0.8 0.7 0.8 1.5 1.8 1.8
Industry 5.1 3.2 3.5 3.6 4.2 4.2
Services 3.4 5.1 5.5 4.9 4.0 4.1
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 1.9 0.9 2.0 2.1 2.3 2.8
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -7.8 -6.8 -8.0 -7.1 -6.9 -6.7
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 6.4 5.6 6.8 5.9 5.7 5.5
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 8.0 8.7 9.4 8.5 7.0 6.5
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -4.9 -1.8 -2.0 -2.0 -1.6 -1.4
Debt (% of GDP) 73.1 72.4 71.0 69.0 66.6 64.3
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -2.2 0.7 0.2 0.1 0.9 1.1
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.5
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 6.5 5.8 5.6 5.1 4.7 4.2
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 35.4 33.9 32.8 31.3 29.5 27.2
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2012-LSMS. Nowcast: 2015 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2012) with pass-through = 0.87 based on private consumption per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 41 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 55
The fiscal deficit narrowed slightly in
Recent developments 2017, to 4.7 percent of GDP (down from
ARMENIA 5.5 percent in 2016), but remained wider
than the budgeted deficit of 2.8 percent of
Armenia's economic performance outper- GDP. While tax revenue increased by 7.3
formed expectations in 2017, recording the percent year on year in 2017—driven by
Table 1 2017 highest rate of growth since 2007. Follow- higher collections of excise taxes, customs
Population, million 3.0 ing a flat economic performance in 2016, duties and environmental taxes—as a per-
GDP, current US$ billion 11.6 real GDP expanded by 7.5 percent, mainly centage of GDP revenue declined by 0.8
GDP per capita, current US$ 3813 driven by a recovery in the external envi- percentage points compared with 2016.
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 1.8 ronment. Growth was also supported by Capital expenditure rose by 36 percent
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 14.1 a strong rebound in domestic demand. year on year in nominal terms, but tight
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 43.5 Consumption benefited from higher in- control over current spending resulted in
comes—buoyed by a boost to remittance a decline of 1.6 percentage points in over-
Gini coefficienta 32.5 inflows of about 12 percent year on year all expenditure as a share of GDP. At the
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 98.5 and nominal average wage growth of 3 end of 2017, public debt (including CBA
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 74.2 percent—which also benefited poor and debt) totaled almost 59 percent of GDP.
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. vulnerable households. The current account deficit continued to
Notes: On the production side, growth was driv- narrow for a third consecutive year and is
(a) Most recent value (2016), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). en by a significant expansion in trade (16 estimated to have fallen to under 2 per-
percent), industry (10 percent) and ser- cent of GDP in 2017. The improvement in
vices (9 percent). Also the construction the current account was driven by a
sector showed modest growth (3 percent), strong increase in export earnings (up 25
but output remains below its pre-crisis percent year on year)—particularly from
Firming international metal prices, eco- level of 2008. The agriculture sector minerals and processed food products—
nomic recovery in Russia, and stronger shrunk (by 4 percent), due to unfavorable robust growth in tourist arrivals and ex-
domestic demand supported a real GDP weather conditions. ports of other services (such as ICT), and
A period of deflation came to an end in improvement in the income account. The
growth rate of 7.5 percent in 2017, the
2017 and inflation began rising, reaching strong inflows were partially offset by a
largest annual expansion in a decade.
an annual rate of 2.6 percent by year-end, significant increase in import spending
Growth in the medium term is projected within the central bank's inflation target of (28 percent year on year), a large share of
to converge towards its potential of 4 percent (+/- 1.5 percentage points). Re- which comprised capital imports linked
around 4 percent, accompanied by a con- covering domestic demand, gradually to investment.
rising commodity prices and excise tax Banking sector performance remained
tinued (albeit gradual) decline in the pov-
hikes resulted in higher prices for food, solid, with a capital adequacy ratio of just
erty rate. However, external vulnerabili- beverages, cigarettes, and transport, under 20 percent on average at end-2017,
ties and delayed structural reforms could affecting the purchasing power of poor well above the minimum requirement of
undermine economic growth. and vulnerable groups, which traditional- 12 percent. At the end of 2017, the non-
ly spend a higher share of their budget on performing loan ratio stood at 5.5 percent,
these items. its lowest level since the 2014 Russian
FIGURE 1 Armenia / GDP growth, fiscal, and current FIGURE 2 Armenia / Actual and projected poverty rates and
account balance real private consumption per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
8 100 2000000
80
4 1500000
60
0
1000000
40
-4
500000
20
Real GDP growth, % change
-8
CAB, % of GDP 0 0
Fiscal balance, % of GDP 2001200320052007200920112013201520172019
-12 International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: National Statistics Service of Armenia, Central Bank of Armenia and Source: World Bank (see notes to Table 2).
World Bank staff projections.
MPO 42 Apr 18
56 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
crisis. Dollarization ratios for bank depos- communication technology (ICT), and partners—as well as its low level of ex-
its and loans declined slightly but re- tourism sectors are expected to deliver port diversification—will remain high.
mained high at around 60 percent. Total solid growth as efforts to boost competi- Adverse shocks linked to the Russian
lending grew by 10 percent, while the tiveness and connectivity start to deliver recovery or metal export prices would
Dram lending rate fell by 260 basis points results. As the economy continues to grow have a negative impact on economic
over the course of 2017. and incomes rise—and remittance inflows growth rates over the near to medium
The economic recovery in 2017 is expected continue to support livelihoods thanks to term. Fiscal slippage could trigger the
to have supported a further reduction in a benign external environment—the abso- need for sharper adjustments in public
poverty rates, which have been on a de- lute poverty rate is forecast to decline to spending, undermining domestic demand
clining trend since the global economic 8.1 percent in 2020. and real economic activity. Fiscal policy
crisis. The absolute poverty rate Although price pressures are forecast to should remain prudent to contain public
(measured at the 2011 PPP-adjusted increase in the short term, mainly due to debt levels. Avoiding fiscal procyclicality
US$3.2/day poverty line) is estimated to higher customs duties and excise taxes on will help prevent macroeconomic imbal-
have fallen from 14.1 percent in 2016 to fuels starting in 2018, inflation is projected ances and reduce the risks associated
11.6 percent in 2017. to remain within the official target range. with overheating (including potential
The new Tax Code, which becomes fully competitiveness losses) during periods of
effective in 2018, lays the foundation for strong economic growth. Continuing co-
Outlook better tax administration and higher tax ordination with the monetary authorities
revenues. Implementation of the upgrad- and the maintenance of a flexible ex-
ed fiscal rule (approved in December change rate will be vital to avoid episodes
Armenia's economic outlook remains pos- 2017) will result in stronger discipline for of real exchange rate appreciation that
itive. The strong performance in 2017 sug- current spending and will provide some can lead to losses in competitiveness.
gests the opening of a window of oppor- room to increase growth-friendly capital Sustaining robust economic growth will
tunity to undertake the reforms needed to expenditures while also stabilizing and require bold structural reforms—such as
make growth inclusive and sustainable. eventually reducing the public debt. providing a fair and competitive business
On the assumption of sustained favorable and investment environment—to address
external economic conditions and robust fundamental problems in Armenia's econ-
structural reforms, medium-term growth Risks and challenges omy. Increasing country-wide access to
is forecast to be around the potential economic opportunities will help to boost
growth rate (4 percent), supported by pri- household incomes and drive a further
vate-sector, export-led activity. In particu- Armenia’s vulnerability to economic con- reduction in poverty, particularly in sec-
lar, the agribusiness, information and ditions in Russia and its other trading ondary cities where poverty is highest.
TABLE 2 Armenia / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 3.2 0.2 7.5 4.1 4.0 4.0
Private Consumption -7.8 -1.3 8.8 5.0 4.7 4.5
Government Consumption 4.7 4.1 9.8 4.3 3.7 3.5
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 2.5 -11.4 7.3 4.5 4.2 4.1
Exports, Goods and Services 4.9 19.1 23.2 10.1 9.8 9.5
Imports, Goods and Services -15.1 7.6 24.0 10.3 9.5 8.9
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 4.3 0.7 7.2 4.1 4.0 4.0
Agriculture 13.2 -5.8 -4.0 2.5 2.7 2.4
Industry 2.8 -0.9 8.0 5.4 5.2 5.1
Services 2.1 4.0 10.5 3.9 3.8 3.9
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 3.7 -1.4 1.0 3.5 3.8 4.0
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -2.6 -2.3 -1.7 -2.9 -3.5 -3.8
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 4.0 4.5 1.4 2.9 3.5 3.8
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 1.5 2.6 4.1 4.4 4.5 4.7
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -4.8 -5.5 -4.7 -2.6 -2.5 -2.3
Debt (% of GDP) 48.7 56.6 58.8 58.6 58.3 57.5
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -3.6 -2.7 -0.5 -0.3 0.0
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 1.9 1.8 1.4 1.3 1.0 0.8
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 13.5 14.1 11.6 10.1 9.1 8.1
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 48.3 43.5 39.9 38.2 36.8 35.2
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2016-ILCS. Actual data: 2015, 2016. Nowcast: 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2016) with pass-through = 0.7 based on private consumption per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 43 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 57
y/y, led by a rise in oil exports, as oil pric-
Recent developments es recovered (oil exports accounted for 90
AZERBAIJAN percent of total exports), while imports
rebounded by 3 percent y/y (compared to
The Azerbaijani economy had a very mod- a drop in 2016). Non-oil exports increased
est recovery in 2017, as a rebound in the by 22 percent y/y, supported by stronger
Table 1 2017 non-oil economy was offset by a contrac- external demand, mainly from Russia. The
Population, million 9.9 tion in the oil sector due to substantial current account recorded an estimated
GDP, current US$ billion 40.7 OPEC-led cuts in oil production and ca- surplus of 4.3 percent of GDP in 2017.
GDP per capita, current US$ 4128 pacity constraints. In particular, the non- The tightening monetary policy, improved
School enrollment, primary (% gross)a 106.6 oil sector rebounded by 2.7 percent year- external environment, and transfers from
Life expectancy at birth, yearsa 71.8 on-year (y/y), supported by benign public the Oil Fund to the central bank helped to
financing, stronger external demand, and maintain a broadly stable exchange rate at
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. improved confidence in response to recov- 1.7 AZN per USD in 2017. As a result, the
Notes:
ering oil prices. With the exception of the central bank’s reserves increased by 34
(a) Most recent WDI value (2015). construction sector, output increased in all percent y/y in 2017 and totaled US$5.3
non-oil sectors with strong y/y growth billion by end-2017. The Oil Fund’s assets
recorded in transport (8.5 percent), infor- rose by 8.02 percent y/y and totaled US$
mation and communication technologies 35.8 billion (about 87% of GDP) in January
(6.6 percent), tourism (5.9 percent) and 2018, mainly due to higher oil prices and a
agriculture (4.2 percent). On the down- portfolio revaluation.
Azerbaijan’s economy had a very modest
side, and despite higher oil prices, oil GDP In June 2017, the Government of Azerbai-
recovery in 2017. Benign public financ- contracted by 5 percent y/y. jan (GoA) relaxed its fiscal consolidation
ing, improved confidence, and a favorable Annual end-year inflation declined from program, and public spending was re-
external environment supported non-oil 15.6 percent in 2016 to 7.9 percent in 2017, vised up to primarily inject capital equiva-
as the effect of the exchange rate pass- lent to 0.7 percent of GDP in the Azerbai-
economic growth, but this was offset by
through and the impact of administrative jan Deposit Insurance Fund1. Higher
an OPEC-led decline in oil production. tariffs dissipated. The high inflation rate budget spending is estimated to have wid-
Going forward, growth is expected to recorded for food items (9.4 percent y/y) ened the consolidated fiscal deficit
strengthen, driven mainly by a fiscal was due to a strong external demand for (comprising State Budget, the Oil Fund,
agricultural products. To curb inflation, the Social Protection Fund and the Na-
stimulus, a rise in hydrocarbon prices,
the central bank continued to tighten the khchivan Government) from a nearly bal-
and an increase in gas exports. Social monetary policy stance by actively absorb- anced position in 2016 to a deficit of 1.5
conditions remain a major source of con- ing manat liquidity through the use of percent of GDP in 2017.
cern, as real wages and spending on social deposit auction operations and the issu- There were signs of recovery in Azerbai-
ance of notes. jan’s financial sector in 2017, supported by
protection programs declined in 2017.
Higher oil prices, sluggish import growth, the stabilization of the manat exchange
and expanded non-oil exports helped to rate and growth across the non-oil sectors.
improve Azerbaijan’s balance of payments The level of non-performing loans is re-
in 2017. Exports expanded by 50 percent ported to have dropped from 33 percent
FIGURE 1 Azerbaijan / Non-oil sectors influenced by FIGURE 2 Azerbaijan / Official poverty rate
oil price
Percent Percent Percent
12 40 50 49.0 46.7
10 30 45 44.7
8 20 40 40.2
10 Poverty headcount ratio at national line
6 35
0 29.3
4 30
-10
2 25
-20 20.8
0 -30 20 15.8
-2 -40 15 13.2 10.9
9.1
-4 -50 10 7.6 6.0 5.3 5.0 4.9 5.9
-6 -60 5
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
0
Non-oil GDP growth, y/y % Oil price, y/y % (RHS)
Source: State Statistical Committee. Source: State Statistical Committee.
Notes: The official national poverty rates for 2013-16 have not been reviewed by
the World Bank.
MPO 44 Apr 18
58 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
in 1Q2016 to 19 percent in 4Q2017, thanks the Shah-Deniz II field will be operational and enhanced government support to
to the restructuring (largely at fiscal cost). by end-2018. Since the OPEC-deal is ex- exporters of non-oil products. However,
The restructuring of the largest bank — tended until the end of 2018, Azerbaijan’s spending cuts on social protection, as well
the state-owned International Bank of crude oil output is not expected to decline as a moderate economic recovery, are not
Azerbaijan (IBA)—was completed. IBA’s much further. Moreover, average oil pric- conducive to poverty reduction.
external liabilities worth US$3.3 billion es will firm up somewhat in 2018 relative
were converted into longer-term liabilities to 2017 and are projected to stabilize at
and the sovereign debt. robust levels in the medium term. Non-oil Risks and challenges
High inflation adversely affected house- GDP growth is expected to accelerate in
hold incomes and reduced the real pur- 2018, fueled by an 83-percent y/y increase
chasing power. In 2017, the increase in the in budgeted public investment. Neverthe- Following the recovery in oil prices after
minimal cost of living and nominal aver- less, growth in the non-oil economy is the 2014-16 shock, the likelihood of a pro-
age wages by 11.6 percent y/y and 6 per- expected to remain moderate due to a cyclical economic policy rather than eco-
cent y/y, respectively, was not sufficient to protracted recovery of the banking sector nomic reforms to stimulate growth is ris-
compensate for higher prices. As a result, and a weak business environment. ing. The main challenge is to preserve the
poverty likely increased in 2017 and was The GoA plans a fiscal stimulus in 2018 reform momentum induced by the shock
probably worsened by the 50-percent cut through boosting capital spending, which and strengthen institutions to ensure the
in the coverage of the country’s most im- will be primarily financed by an increase resilience of the economy to future exter-
portant social assistance program. in budget transfers from the sovereign nal shocks. Moreover, progress on the
wealth fund. The consolidated fiscal bal- structural reform agenda to stimulate pri-
ance is likely to be slightly positive in 2018 vate-sector participation and jobs creation
Outlook and is estimated to average 1.3 percent of remains limited. An adaptive and effective
GDP in the medium term, as oil prices social protection system and programs
remain firm and gas exports rise. aimed at productive inclusion of poor and
Azerbaijan’s economy is projected to ex- To contain inflation, the central bank vulnerable households are needed to re-
pand by 1.8 percent y/y in 2018, support- needs to continue tightening monetary duce poverty.
ed mainly by the fiscal stimulus. The policy. Azerbaijan’s external sector is ex-
growth is expected to accelerate in the pected to continue to improve due to an
medium term, driven by an expansion of increase in hydrocarbon production and a
natural gas production, as the main pipe- continuation of non-oil export growth, 1/ ADIF was established in 2007 to protect individual
line that will deliver gas to Europe from supported by a rise in external demand deposits when banks are closed.
TABLE 2 Azerbaijan / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 1.1 -3.1 0.1 1.8 3.8 3.2
Private Consumption 5.4 -2.8 2.7 3.2 3.3 3.4
Government Consumption -7.1 -8.1 1.8 3.0 0.3 -0.7
Gross Fixed Capital Investment -8.7 -20.0 -5.0 2.5 4.5 4.4
Exports, Goods and Services -1.0 -2.0 -1.1 0.3 4.0 3.5
Imports, Goods and Services -5.0 -10.0 0.2 2.2 2.4 2.8
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 1.0 -3.1 0.1 1.8 3.8 3.2
Agriculture 6.6 2.6 4.2 4.0 4.1 4.2
Industry -2.0 -4.9 -2.8 -0.1 3.2 2.7
Services 6.9 -0.3 5.4 5.0 4.8 4.0
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 7.7 15.6 7.9 6.4 4.2 3.9
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -0.4 -3.6 4.3 5.9 7.2 7.9
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) -16.8 -7.2 -4.3 -5.9 -7.2 -7.9
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 3.2 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.3 2.1
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -6.2 0.3 -1.5 0.4 1.4 2.1
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -5.5 1.0 -0.4 1.7 2.3 2.7
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast. Fiscal accounts are calculated using Global Economic Prospects oil projections.
MPO 45 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 59
budget surplus has been spent on repay-
Recent developments ment and servicing public debt in foreign
BELARUS currency, which amounted to
US$3.26 billion, or 6.9 percent of GDP.
The modest cyclical expansion continues, Pressures were partially eased by the dis-
supported by improving external condi- bursement of the two tranches of the
Table 1 2017 tions and recovery in industry. In 2017, EFSD loan (totaling US$600 million), dis-
Population, million 9.4 the economy grew at 2.4 percent y/y, a bursement of a bilateral loan from Russia
GDP, current US$ billion 57.0 rebound from the contraction of (US$700 million), and the issuance of Eu-
GDP per capita, current US$ 6039 2.5 percent y/y in 2016. Modest economic robonds—US$1.4 billion in 2017, and
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 0.7 growth in Russia and a gradual increase US$0.6 billion in February 2018. Exports
Gini coefficienta 27.0 in commodity prices boosted merchandize recovered, helping to bring down the cur-
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 101.3 exports and supported an increase in do- rent account deficit to 1.1 percent of GDP
mestic business activity. On the demand in January-November 2017 (vs 3.2 percent
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 73.6
side, real wage increases helped to in- a year ago), yet driven by the primary
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. crease household consumption by almost income deficit of 4 percent of GDP.
Notes:
(a) Most recent value (2016), 2011 PPPs. 6 percent in 3Q 2017 (vs. 6.5 percent fall in Real wage increases have stopped the
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). 3Q 2016). In the same period, growth of deterioration of household incomes. In
gross fixed capital formation recovered to 2017, real wages and disposable incomes
1.8 percent – mainly due to rebound of grew by 6.2 and 2.4 percent respectively,
public investment – versus the dramatic benefiting from lower inflation. Disposa-
fall by 18.9 percent in 3Q 2016. ble incomes growth was the highest in
Improving external conditions, stronger In 2017, annual average inflation slowed Minsk, but also in regions with higher
to 4.6 percent helped by better anchored absolute poverty rates, such as Brest and
domestic demand, and prudent macroeco-
inflation expectations, moderation in ad- Gomel. The hires-to-terminations ratio
nomic policies supported a cyclical recov-
ministrative price adjustments, and im- throughout 2017 exceeded that of 2016 by
ery in 2017 and early 2018. Real incomes ported disinflation. Moderating inflation an average of 12 percent. The share of
started to pick up, but accelerated wage has allowed the National Bank to cut its households below the official poverty
benchmark rate from 17 to 10.5 percent threshold remained stable throughout the
growth, along with other fiscal stimulus,
during 2017, leading to an almost twofold first three quarters of 2017.
could pose risks to macro stability. Rising
reduction in nominal lending rates in na-
public debt levels and continued depend- tional currency. As a result, supply of new
ence on external financing make the econ- credit in nominal terms went up by almost Outlook
omy vulnerable to macroeconomic shocks. 30 percent y/y. However, NPL levels re-
main at around 13 percent and a compre-
The revival of economic growth requires
hensive NPL resolution mechanism is still While the recovery is underway, annual
addressing structural bottlenecks imped- not put in place. economic growth rates are unlikely to ex-
ing productivity improvements. Quasi-fiscal expenditures continue to put ceed 3 percent. Improved household con-
pressures on public debt levels and exter- sumption and investment activity, along
nal financing needs. Recorded primary with gradual increase in exports, will help
FIGURE 1 Belarus / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Belarus / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real GDP per capita
Percentage points Poverty rate (%) GDP per capita (constant LCU)
15 60 2500000
10
50
2000000
5
0 40
1500000
-5 30
-10 1000000
20
-15
Q1/14 Q3/14 Q1/15 Q3/15 Q1/16 Q3/16 Q1/17 Q3/17 500000
10
Total consumption of goods and services
Gross capital formation
Exports of goods and services 0 0
Imports of goods and services 2001200320052007200920112013201520172019
Statistical discrepancy
GDP growth Upper middle-income pov. rate GDP pc
Sources: World Bank Staff Calculations based on Belstat data. Sources: World Bank. Notes: see Table 2.
MPO 46 Apr 18
60 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
the economy to grow. At the same time, is likely to remain close to a half of GDP in public debt repayments and service (or
persisting domestic structural bottlenecks the medium term. Majority of gross exter- about 5.4 percent of forecasted GDP),
related to unaddressed legacy issues of nal debt pertains to the public sector and is while domestic obligations of the Govern-
misallocation of capital and low export characterized by a heavy and uneven debt ment denominated in foreign currency
diversification will continue to constrain service profile with repayment peaks every add another US$0.7 billion (or about 1.2
the growth potential. Weak foundations few years. As the public debt is largely percent of GDP).
for a sustainable growth recovery imply denominated in foreign currency, there is a Downside risks from domestic factors
that income per capita gaps between Bela- risk of disorderly adjustment in external relate to a possibility of a disorderly un-
rus and its neighbors may widen as the imbalance due to tightening of global fi- winding of financial sector imbalances if
economies of the Baltic States and Poland nancial conditions. Second, Belarus re- mechanisms for addressing insolvent
are projected to grow on average above mains vulnerable to changes in global com- SOEs and NPL resolution are not put in
3 percent per annum. At the same time, modity prices and in terms of its energy place. In addition, there are risks to fiscal
modest growth would ease balance-of- trade policy with Russia. sustainability arising from existing quasi-
payment pressures, allowing to maintain a Either of these developments would make fiscal deficits related to the excesses of the
current account deficit between 2 and it harder for the government to generate expansionary policies of the past. Reintro-
3percent of GDP over the next three years. the foreign currency needed to service its duction of short-term demand stimulus is
debt. Belarus’s experience with the 2017 risky, leaving little prospects for improv-
Eurobond issuance indicates that access to ing enterprise performance and strength-
Risks and challenges external market financing – in contrast to ening of financing sector. The effects of
loans from Russia and China – comes at a lower interest rates are limited, as highly
high cost. A ten-year, US$0.6 billion indebted enterprises are unable to invest
Downside risks from external factors are tranche was priced at 7.625 percent, high- more. Boosting productivity of available
coming from two sources. First, although er rates than the ones obtained by emerg- capital and labor remains a sustainable
the headline current account deficits have ing economies. In 2018, the Government way to overcome prolonged stagnation of
narrowed down, a public debt to GDP ratio will allocate US$3.1 billion for external growth and incomes.
TABLE 2 Belarus / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices -3.8 -2.5 2.4 2.9 2.7 2.5
Private Consumption -2.3 -3.9 2.5 3.0 3.1 3.1
Government Consumption -0.5 -0.6 1.3 0.8 1.3 1.3
Gross Fixed Capital Investment -15.5 -16.1 9.9 6.5 5.6 5.2
Exports, Goods and Services 2.1 2.8 7.5 7.2 8.3 8.9
Imports, Goods and Services -10.6 -2.1 9.2 8.0 8.7 9.1
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices -4.6 -2.9 2.9 2.9 2.7 2.5
Agriculture -2.8 3.8 4.1 4.5 3.9 3.8
Industry -6.8 -4.6 6.1 7.2 8.3 7.7
Services -2.3 -2.8 -1.1 -2.8 -5.1 -5.9
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 13.5 11.8 4.6 6.0 6.5 6.5
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -3.3 -3.6 -2.7 -2.9 -3.0 -2.8
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) -2.3 -1.7 1.7 2.6 1.4 1.2
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 2.9 2.6 2.4 2.6 2.6 2.3
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) 2.5 0.1 3.7 2.1 2.1 2.1
Debt (% of GDP) 26.5 43.3 45.9 46.1 46.4 46.8
Primary Balance (% of GDP) 3.7 1.6 6.1 4.7 4.3 3.9
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2016-HHS. Actual data: 2015, 2016. Nowcast: 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2016) with pass-through = 0.7 based on GDP per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 47 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 61
2016. In 2017, revenues rose mainly due
Recent developments to stronger collection of indirect taxes
BOSNIA AND while expenditure declined mainly be-
cause of continued restraint on current
HERZEGOVINA Growth reached an estimated 3 percent in government spending. At the same time,
2017. Domestic demand remains the dom- sluggish capital spending reflected imple-
inant driver of growth with consumption mentation delays.
adding 3pp, investment 0.8 pp and im- Current expenditures are expected to re-
ports 5.1pp. Improved external demand main on a downward, driven by the com-
Table 1 2017
has supported exports growth, but a mitment of the authorities to reduce the
Population, million 3.8
strong rise in imports is offsetting this wage bill. Total public debt in 2017 re-
GDP, current US$ billion 17.2
momentum. With negative overall net mained at 37 percent of GDP (external
GDP per capita, current US$ 4544 exports, they are estimated to have sub- public debt was 27 percent of GDP) and
School enrollment, primary (% gross)a n.a. tracted from growth (-0.8 pp). Unem- consisted largely of concessional debt to
Life expectancy at birth, yearsa 76.6 ployment remains high, although some international financial institutions.
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. improvements are observed in the labor The latest available poverty data using the
Notes: market. The unemployment rate fell from national poverty line is for 2015 and was
(a) Most recent WDI value (2015). 25.4 percent in 2016 to 20.5 in 2017, driven estimated at 16 percent, very close to the
by a fall in activity rate and a slight rise in 15 percent poverty rate estimated for 2011.
employment. The decrease in unemploy- Rural poverty (19 percent) was higher
ment was more pronounced among work- than urban poverty (12 percent). Behind
ers with primary education (from 26 per- the minimal movement in poverty in 2011
cent in 2016 to 18 percent in 2017), which -2015 there was a small positive effect of
should have made poverty recede in 2017. pensions on household incomes, coun-
Economic growth in Bosnia and Herze- After almost two years of deflation, infla- tered mainly by a decrease in employment
govina (BiH), which reached an estimated tion started to pick up in 2017, owing rate and a decline in self-employment
3 percent in 2017, is expected to pick-up mainly to the recovery of global oil price. earnings. The implementation of new la-
The consumer price index increased by bor laws in both BiH entities, and continu-
starting in 2018 with the implementation
1.2 percent year-on-year (y-o-y) in De- ation of support schemes for first-time job
of structural reforms and heavy infra-
cember 2017. The biggest driver of the seekers are expected to improve labor
structure investment. Translating this increase was transport, tobacco and rental markets outcomes in the coming years,
growth into improvements in labor mar- housing. In contrast, prices decreased hence also supporting poverty reduction.
kets will be critical to observe declines in notably on alcohol, clothing, and telecom-
munication services. Given similar
poverty. As BiH enters general elections
growth in nominal salaries, the effect on Outlook
year, political turmoil may be a risk for real incomes was neutral.
economic growth. In 2017, the fiscal balance is expected to
remain in surplus. The latest consolidated Supported primarily by consumption and
data project a 2.0 percent of GDP surplus to some extent by public investment, eco-
in 2017, up from a deficit of 0.3 percent in nomic growth is projected to strengthen to
FIGURE 1 Bosnia and Herzegovina / Real GDP growth and FIGURE 2 Bosnia and Herzegovina / Labor market
contributions to real GDP growth indicators, 2014-2017
Percent, percentage points Percent
5.0 50
4.0 45 43.7 42.7 2014 2015
2016 2017
40
3.0 33.9
35 31.7
2.0
30 27.5
1.0 25 23.5
20.5
0.0 20 16.8
-1.0 15
-2.0 10
5
-3.0
2013 2014 2015 2016f 2017f 2018f 2019f 2020f 0
Activity rate Employment rate Unemployment Unemployment
Private_consumption Government_consumption rate rate over 1 year
Gross_fixed_investment Net exports
duration
GDP
Sources: BiH Agency for Statistics (BHAS), World Bank staff estimate. Sources: LFS 2014-2017 report, World Bank staff calculations.
MPO 48 Apr 18
62 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
about 4 percent by 2020. As the BiH’s re- poverty is projected to decline only slow- poorly-targeted benefits. Fiscal consolida-
form agenda advances, a moderate rise in ly over the next couple of years. tion and provision of an effective safety
exports is expected, but strong demand The current account deficit (CAD) is fore- net will not be effective if structural rigidi-
for imports implies that net external de- cast to rise slightly in 2018 as both imports ties in spending are not addressed—
mand will continue to be a drag on and exports started to pick up in 2017. In especially the high public wage bill. How-
growth. Remittances are likely to remain the medium run, with improved progress ever, support from the international part-
stable, and, together with progress on on ongoing structural reforms and higher ners can help the BiH authorities to deliv-
reforms, will underpin a gradual pickup demand for foreign savings, CAD is ex- er on their challenging reform agenda.
in consumption, which will remain a ma- pected to deteriorate from 5.8 percent of Without continued implementation of
jor driver of growth. Investments in ener- GDP in 2017 to 6.8 percent of GDP by structural reforms, it would be difficult to
gy, construction, and tourism will support 2020. Overall, in the medium term both address rigidities in public employment,
investment growth generally, as well as fiscal and external deficits will persist un- pensions, and debt.
job creation in those sectors. Because of til 2020. There are notable risks, both domestic and
these dynamics, real GDP growth is pro- external. The main domestic risk is the
jected to build up gradually from 3 per- challenging political environment, which
cent in 2017 to 3.2 percent in 2018 and up Risks and challenges makes structural reforms difficult in such
to 4 percent in 2020. areas as infrastructure, telecommunica-
As poverty is strongly associated with tions, energy sector, and transport. It also
unemployment and inactivity in BiH, for Achieving prudent, efficient, and effective raises risks to the economic outlook. De-
economic growth to translate into pov- fiscal policy, addressing persistent unem- spite some delays, BiH has submitted a
erty reduction, improvements in labor ployment and continuing to safeguard the detailed Questionnaire to the European
market participation and employment banking sector, will remain central to the Commission, a major step towards becom-
will remain key. However, with high BiH reform agenda. Although external ing a candidate country. Main external
unemployment and the expectations of deficits continue to be moderate, on the risk for BiH remains slow growth in the
flat real wages due to the substantial fiscal side the tax burden is high, and pub- EU and rising inflation in developed
remaining slack in the labor market, lic spending is inefficient, as evidenced by countries and interest rates.
TABLE 2 Bosnia and Herzegovina / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 3.7 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.4 4.0
Private Consumption 0.4 1.8 3.2 3.4 3.7 3.5
Government Consumption 0.8 1.8 3.6 5.5 6.3 4.2
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 1.0 1.7 3.8 2.5 6.5 4.7
Exports, Goods and Services 6.3 4.1 12.5 9.2 4.7 3.6
Imports, Goods and Services 0.9 1.2 9.9 8.0 6.5 3.3
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.1 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.4 4.0
Agriculture 9.2 5.0 2.8 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry 3.4 3.0 2.7 3.0 3.0 3.0
Services 2.3 2.9 3.1 3.4 3.6 4.5
Inflation (Private Consumption Deflator) 1.0 -0.8 1.2 1.4 1.4 1.4
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -5.7 -4.5 -5.8 -6.2 -6.8 -6.8
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) -2.0 -1.4 7.0 7.4 8.1 6.9
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) -1.4 -1.6 1.2 2.5 2.8 2.8
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) 0.6 -0.3 2.0 1.3 0.2 0.0
Debt (% of GDP) 40.6 41.1 36.8 33.3 30.8 29.5
Primary Balance (% of GDP) 1.5 0.8 3.2 2.8 1.4 0.9
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
MPO 49 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 63
ing the deterioration of the trade bal-
Recent developments ance and lower EU transfers.
BULGARIA At 72.1 percent, the employment rate (20-
64) reached record high levels while unem-
Economic growth remained strong in Bul- ployment was close to pre-crisis levels.
garia at 3.6 percent in 2017, only slightly However, the working age population
Table 1 2017 lower than 3.9 percent in 2016. Consump- continued to shrink constraining the ex-
Population, million 7.1 tion and investment were the main drivers pansion of potential growth. Labor and
GDP, current US$ billion 55.8 of growth while the contribution of net skill shortages as well as rising minimum
GDP per capita, current US$ 7887 exports was negative in 2017. Consump- wages pushed overall salaries up about 9
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 1.0 tion was supported by a dynamic labor percent compared with 2016.
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 3.8 market, rising wages, and eased financial Strong labor market conditions supported
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 7.5 credit conditions. Investment expanded at continued improvement in poverty reduc-
a solid rate, despite slow implementation tion. Poverty measured using the Upper
Gini coefficienta 37.4 of public investment projects. On the pro- Middle-Income Class line of $5.5 per day
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 97.2 duction side, the greatest contributions to (in 2011 PPP terms) is estimated to have
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 74.5 GDP growth came from manufacturing; declined from 8.5 percent in 2015 to 7.5
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. construction; real estate; trade, transport, percent in 2017 (see Notes to Table 2).
Notes: and tourism. However, income inequality in Bulgaria is
(a) See Notes to Table 2.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2014). Strong domestic demand and higher ener- the highest in the EU and has been increas-
gy and commodity prices pushed inflation ing over the last few years, with the in-
up. After three years of deflation, inflation come of the richest 20 percent of the popu-
turned positive to 2.1 percent in 2017. lation equal to almost eight times that of
Economic growth remained strong in Fiscal performance remained positive on the poorest 20 percent in 2015. The cover-
2017, slightly lower compared with 2016. the back of improved revenue collection age and adequacy of the social transfer
and lower than planned public investment system remains low. Unemployment has
The employment rate peaked and wages
spending. Tax revenues grew by 10 per- declined significantly but regional varia-
were pushed up by labor and skill short-
cent in 2017 compared with 2016 thanks to tions and long-term and youth unemploy-
ages. Output and employment growth strong economic activity, better compli- ment remain high. Inactivity among cer-
contributed to a reduction in poverty. ance, higher minimum wages and an in- tain groups of the population persists and
Further gains in growth, poverty reduc- crease in the pension contribution rate. many citizens – including the elderly, peo-
Like 2016, capital investment was well ple living in rural areas, and the Roma –
tion and shared prosperity hinge on the
below expectations as implementation of are excluded from economic opportunities.
implementation of policies to boost EU funded projects remained slow. In-
productivity. Policy areas that require stead of planned deficit of 0.6 percent of
attention include strengthening institu- GDP, fiscal accounts were balanced for the Outlook
second year in a row.
tions, enhancing the skills of the labor
The current account surplus narrowed
force, and improving the effectiveness
to 3.9 percent of GDP in 2017 com- GDP growth is expected to remain robust,
and efficiency of public spending. pared with 5.3 percent in 2016 follow- reaching 3.8 percent in 2018. Domestic
FIGURE 1 Bulgaria / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Bulgaria / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real GDP per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) GDP per capita (constant LCU)
6 25 16000
5
14000
4 20
12000
3
2 15 10000
1 8000
0 10 6000
-1
4000
-2 5
2000
-3
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017e 2018f 2019f 2020f 0 0
2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Consumption Gross capital formation
Change in inventories Net Exports International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
GDP Upper middle-income pov. rate GDP pc
Sources: NSI; MFMod, World Bank. Sources: World Bank (see notes to Table 2).
MPO 50 Apr 18
64 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
demand will continue to support growth health, public order, and infrastructure labor costs and therefore undermine com-
as the expected intensified absorption of could undermine fiscal consolidation and petitiveness. Further acceleration of real
EU funds will boost investment, likely limit the potential of public spending to estate prices in large cities could negative-
outweighing the negative contribution of enhance growth. ly affect the quality of bank portfolios.
net exports. Private consumption is ex- Poverty reduction is expected to continue Upside factors likely to lead to higher-
pected to continue expanding thanks to at a modest pace in the near term. Sus- than expected growth are an enhanced
tight labor markets and rising real estate tained improvements in employment and economic sentiment in Europe and strong-
prices in large cities. Going forward, wages, as well as recent increases in the er global economic activity.
GDP growth is projected to moderate to minimum pension, should support real The key challenges for Bulgaria are to
3.6 percent in 2019 and 2020. Domestic incomes and therefore further reductions accelerate convergence with the rest of the
demand should remain the driver of in poverty. Poverty is projected to fall EU and to build a more inclusive society.
growth with an increasing contribution from 7.5 percent in 2017, as measured at Accelerating convergence requires im-
of investment. $5.5 a day in 2011 PPP, to 7.0 percent in provements in productivity and labor
The current account balance is likely to 2018, and to 6.3 percent by 2020. force participation as the demographic
remain in surplus, but narrow net ex- transition is weighing on the size of the
ports will continue to deteriorate and an working age population. Enhancing
expected slowdown in EU growth due to Risks and challenges productivity growth requires addressing
higher oil and commodity prices. governance challenges (public administra-
The fiscal position is likely to weaken tion, judiciary, business environment,
slightly in 2018 and 2019, reflecting plans Risks to the projected growth path are governance of SOEs) that have under-
for expansion of public investment and broadly balanced. Lower than expected mined Bulgaria’s structural transfor-
increasing wages and social assistance European growth could undermine export mation. Enhancing the skills and employ-
payments. Strong revenue collection, driv- growth, while tightening global financial ability of all Bulgarians, more effective
en by further improvements in compli- market conditions could increase the cost and efficient public spending on health,
ance and an increased pension contribu- of lending to the private sector with nega- pensions and long-term care are also
tion rate in 2018, is likely to support fiscal tive implications for investment. Continued needed to ensure inclusiveness and sus-
consolidation in the medium term. Lack of wage growth at a faster pace than produc- tainability of growth in the face of demo-
improvement in spending efficiency in tivity could translate into increasing unit graphic changes.
TABLE 2 Bulgaria / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 3.6 3.9 3.6 3.8 3.6 3.6
Private Consumption 4.5 3.6 4.8 5.2 4.7 4.5
Government Consumption 1.4 2.2 3.2 3.2 1.7 0.8
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 2.7 -6.6 3.8 7.3 6.7 7.2
Exports, Goods and Services 5.7 8.1 4.0 3.9 4.0 4.0
Imports, Goods and Services 5.4 4.5 7.2 5.9 5.4 5.2
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.0 3.2 3.7 3.8 3.6 3.6
Agriculture -6.8 5.3 -0.1 2.1 1.9 1.9
Industry 3.6 3.2 3.4 3.2 3.5 3.8
Services 3.3 3.1 4.1 4.2 3.7 3.6
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) -0.1 -0.8 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.2
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 0.0 5.3 3.9 2.3 1.4 0.7
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 4.6 0.5 -3.8 -2.3 -1.3 -0.6
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 5.5 1.4 1.8 2.3 2.3 2.4
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -1.6 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -0.2 0.2
Debt (% of GDP) 26.0 29.0 25.6 24.3 23.0 21.4
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -0.7 0.9 1.0 0.7 0.7 1.1
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 1.2 1.2 1.0 0.7 0.6 0.6
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 3.6 3.6 3.3 3.1 2.9 2.7
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 8.5 7.9 7.5 7.0 6.7 6.3
Source: NWSoI;r lBd NBBan; Ek,u Proosvteartt; yW &o Erlqdu Bitay nakn,d M Maaccroroeeccoonnoommicicss a, nTdr aFdisec &a lI nMveasntamgeemnte Gnlto Gblaol bParla Pcrtaiccetsic.e, and Poverty Global Practice.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on EU-SILC harmonization, using 2014-EU-SILC. Nowcast: 2015 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2014) with pass-through = 0.87 based on GDP per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 51 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 65
stronger than expected fall in the govern-
Recent developments ment’s debt ratio to 80 percent of GDP in
CROATIA 2017, down from 82.7 in 2016.
External imbalances narrowed further as
GDP growth slowed from 3.2 percent in the current account surplus increased to
2016 to 2.8 percent in 2017. Exports of 3.7 percent of GDP in September 2017 (on
Table 1 2017 goods and services was the main driver of a four-quarter basis). This rise is expected
Population, million 4.1 growth in 2017. Tourism recorded excep- to be only temporary, as it reflects a fall in
GDP, current US$ billion 54.9 tional performance with foreign tourist banks’ profits resulting from their expo-
GDP per capita, current US$ 13297 nights rising by over 11 percent, and sures to Agrokor Group. External debt (of
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 1.3 strong growth of merchandise export con- the public and private sectors) declined to
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 5.8 tinued. Private consumption also made a 84.2 percent of GDP in November 2017,
Gini coefficienta 30.8 positive contribution to growth, supported 5.6 percent lower than 2016, as banks and
by favorable labor market developments the private corporate sector continued to
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 98.0
and personal income tax rate cuts. Howev- deleverage.
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 77.3 er, the share of imported durable goods in Employment rose across the board, with
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. consumption increased. On balance, the manufacturing, tourism and construction
Notes: effect of net exports on growth turned neg- accounting for more than a half of the
(a) Most recent value (2015), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). ative. In addition, growth slowed down increase. Together with negative migra-
because investment growth decelerated tion flows, this led to a marked decline of
markedly. This was mainly due to a weak- the survey-based unemployment rate to
er absorption of EU funds, which led to a an estimated 11 percent in 2017, down
sharp fall in government investments. from 13.1 percent in 2016. Real net wages
Economic growth decelerated to 2.8 per-
Following deflationary pressures in 2016, increased by 4.2 percent y-o-y in Decem-
cent in 2017 due to a slowdown in gov- prices increased by 1.1 percent y-o-y in ber. The positive wage trends are due the
ernment investment and a rebound in 2017 on the back of the recovery of inter- recovery of firms' profitability, labor
imports. The poverty rate is projected to national oil and food prices. With inflation shortages in some sectors, a 6-percent rise
still subdued, the Croatian National Bank in public sector wages and cuts in the per-
have declined to 5.1 percent as disposable
(CNB) continued to pursue an expansion- sonal income tax rate.
incomes have increased. Strong fiscal con- ary monetary policy throughout 2017. Economic recovery and labor market
solidation continued in 2017, leading to a Fiscal consolidation also continued in improvements are now starting to re-
further fall in the debt ratio. However, the 2017, with the budget surplus estimated at duce absolute poverty, after increasing
0.1 percent of GDP, down from a deficit of during six subsequent years of economic
reform momentum has faltered and, with-
0.9 percent in 2016. The surplus was recession. The poverty rate measured at
out addressing substantial economic and achieved by buoyant tax collection and the upper middle-income class poverty
institutional weaknesses, prospects for constrained growth in expenditures in line line of $5.5 at 2011 PPP per capita fell
reinitiating real convergence and promot- with the November 2017 budget revision. from 7.3 percent in 2013 to 5.8 percent in
The combination of a significant primary 2015, which is still higher than the pre-
ing inclusive growth are weak.
surplus and a small debt reducing interest crisis rate. The poverty rate for 2017 is
-rate growth differential resulted in a projected at 5.1 percent, suggesting that
FIGURE 1 Croatia / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Croatia / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real GDP per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) GDP per capita (constant LCU)
4 8 100000
3 7
2 6 80000
1
5 60000
0
4
-1 3 40000
-2
2
-3 20000
1
-4
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018f 2019f 2020f 0 0
2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
Final consumption Gross fixed capital formation
Change in inventories Net exports Lower middle-income pov. rate Upper middle-income pov. rate
Residual item GDP growth GDP pc
Sources: CROSTAT, World Bank. Sources: World Bank (see notes to Table 2).
MPO 52 Apr 18
66 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
the reduction in poverty is slowing down. 2020, leading to a further decline in public goods to GDP growth is expected to stay
While real per capita income has returned debt to below 70 percent of GDP. Howev- high, it is exposed to the risk of a slow-
to its 2008 level, output is still about 4 er, the overall fiscal stance will become down in external demand from the EU.
percent lower than in 2008. Therefore, the moderately pro-cyclical, as the structural Furthermore, the still high level of public
rebound in per capita income reflects the budget balance is expected to worsen. debt makes Croatia vulnerable to interest
impact of demographic trends. Positive labor market developments are rate shocks and worsening external fi-
expected to support the growth of dispos- nancing conditions. Finally, the cyclical
able income for all segments of the wel- upturn and the sounder fiscal position
Outlook fare distribution. The continued decline in may foster continued complacency. The
the share of long-term unemployed and lack of reforms would have an adverse
NEETs will reduce the absolute poverty effect on growth over the medium term.
Growth is expected to slow further to 2.6 rate further to 4.0 percent in 2020. Croatia’s prospects for improving higher
percent in 2018, due to a slowdown in and more inclusive growth remain weak.
private consumption as the favorable Currently low potential growth calls for a
effects of the tax reform on real wages Risks and challenges strong structural reform agenda. Substan-
start to fade. Furthermore, exports of tour- tial economic, social and institutional
ist services are expected to slow in 2018, weaknesses should be addressed to boost
due to capacity constraints. On the other Risks are slightly skewed to the downside. private sector productivity and competi-
hand, better absorption of EU funds will As the operational restructuring of Agro- tiveness, raise the quality of human and
give a boost to investment spending. kor Group unfolds in 2018, the negative physical capital and modernize public
These trends suggest an average economic effects on investment activity and private services. This would lead to increasing
growth of 2.8 percent for 2019 and 2020. consumption might be greater than cur- economic activity and employment,
The government balance is expected to rently envisaged. In addition, although which are crucial for a further reduction
stay in surplus and may reach 1 percent by the positive contribution of exports of in poverty.
TABLE 2 Croatia / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 2.3 3.2 2.8 2.6 2.7 2.8
Private Consumption 1.1 3.5 3.6 3.0 2.8 2.6
Government Consumption -0.9 1.9 2.0 1.5 1.5 1.6
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 3.8 5.3 3.4 6.4 6.9 7.4
Exports, Goods and Services 9.4 5.6 6.1 5.8 5.0 5.0
Imports, Goods and Services 9.2 6.2 8.1 7.4 6.3 6.4
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 2.3 2.8 2.8 2.6 2.7 2.8
Agriculture 1.3 0.6 -2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2
Industry 2.6 4.4 1.3 3.6 2.8 2.8
Services 2.3 2.3 3.6 2.3 2.7 2.8
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) -0.5 -1.0 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.5
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 4.5 2.6 3.6 2.6 1.7 1.0
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) -3.5 -1.7 -3.2 -1.5 -0.6 0.0
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 0.5 4.0 1.3 2.6 2.6 2.8
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -3.3 -0.9 0.1 0.5 0.6 1.0
Debt (% of GDP) 85.4 82.7 80.1 76.0 72.1 67.7
Primary Balance (% of GDP) 0.2 2.3 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.5
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.1 1.0 1.0
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 5.8 5.4 5.1 5.0 4.4 4.0
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on EU-SILC harmonization, using 2015-EU-SILC. Actual data: 2015. Nowcast: 2016 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2015) with pass-through = 0.87 based on GDP per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 53 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 67
0.8 percentage points of GDP from re-
Recent developments duced administrative costs in 2017. This
GEORGIA helped to scale up public investments to
8.3 percent of GDP and slightly narrow
The economy performed well in 2017. fiscal deficit to 3.8 percent of GDP from
GDP growth improved markedly to 5 the 3.9 percent observed in 2016. Georgia’s
Table 1 2017 percent—from 2.8 percent in 2016—led by public debt remained sustainable at 44
Population, million 3.7 an improved external environment. Pru- percent of GDP as of end-2017.
GDP, current US$ billion 15.5 dent macro-fiscal policies helped preserve The banking sector is well capitalized,
GDP per capita, current US$ 4194 fiscal space and supported price stability. profitable and with low non-performing
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 4.2 Inflation spiked to 6.7 percent (eop) in loans (NPLs), although structural vulnera-
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 17.1 2017 in response to higher excise taxes on bilities persist. The sector yielded a return
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 45.5 tobacco and fuel, but dropped to below 3 on assets of 2.8 percent and a return on
percent in February 2018. With inflation equity of over 20 percent as of end-2017.
Gini coefficienta 36.5 above the ceiling of its target range in 2017 Also by December 2017, NPLs represented
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 116.8 and rapid credit growth, the NBG in- only 2.4 percent of gross loans, down from
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 73.0 creased the policy rate by 0.75 bps to 7.25 3.6 percent as of end-2016. At the same
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. percent over 2017. time, systemic vulnerabilities persist, in-
Notes: Georgia’s external position improved cluding the large market concentration by
(a) Most recent value (2016), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). considerably. Export of goods expanded the top two banks, the high retail loan
by 24 percent on the back of strong de- growth (including by non-bank financial
mand from Russia, Azerbaijan, Ukraine, institutions), and elevated dollarization,
China, and the US; tourism proceeds rose against the backdrop of deficient financial
by 27 percent; and worker’s remittances safety nets. NBG plans to address the
Georgia’s growth accelerated to 5.0 per- increased by 21 percent in 2017. Import latter issues with the support from the WB
cent in 2017, on the back of an improved growth was relatively lower, reflecting and IMF.
gradually the firming oil prices. Gross Poverty is estimated to have fallen in 2017,
external environment. In 2018 growth is
FDI inflows increased in 2017 to 12.3 per- driven by an increase of employment op-
projected at 4.5 percent, led by invest-
cent of GDP, helping strengthen the inter- portunities related to the expansion of the
ment. The fiscal deficit declined to 3.8 national reserve position, which stood at construction and services sectors, resum-
percent of GDP in 2017, slightly improv- 4 months of imports of goods and ser- ing the decreasing trend started in 2010
ing from 2016; while fiscal consolidation vices. Total external debt remained high (and which stalled in 2016). The spike in
at 112 percent of GDP at the end Septem- inflation in 2017 may have offset—albeit
will continue in 2018, public investment
ber 2017. to a minor extent—the positive effect of
is expected to remain robust. Poverty is Fiscal policy was prudent. Despite elimi- employment on poverty by reducing
expected to return to its declining trend nating the income tax on reinvested households’ purchasing power. The most
as economic growth recovers and trans- profits starting in 2017, revenues in- recent poverty figures available for the
creased by 11 percent. To prioritize so- country are for the year 2016, when pov-
lates into higher income.
cial and infrastructure spending, the erty was estimated at 17 percent using the
authorities generated savings of about lower-middle income.
FIGURE 1 Georgia / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Georgia / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real GDP per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) GDP per capita (constant LCU)
15 100 4000
3500
10 80
3000
5 60 2500
2000
0 40 1500
-5 1000
20
500
-10
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017p 2018p 2019p 2020p 0 0
2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
Gov. consumption Net Exports
Investments Prv. Consumption International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
GDP growth Upper middle-income pov. rate GDP pc
Sources: Geostat and World Bank staff estimates. Sources: World Bank. Notes: see Table 2.
MPO 54 Apr 18
68 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
programs. The fiscal deficit of the general of GDP. Additional risks stem from con-
Outlook government will be gradually reduced to tingent liabilities generated by the gov-
3.0 percent of GDP by 2020 keeping public ernment’s Power Purchasing Agreements
debt stable. Still, fiscal slippages, or accu- (PPAs). At the end-2017 there were 72
Georgia’s growth outlook over the medi- mulation of new liabilities or materializa- signed PPAs, in which the state issues
um term is positive. The more benign ex- tion of contingent liabilities may compro- guarantees to purchase excess electricity
ternal environment should facilitate the mise the expected consolidation and result from operators on a seasonal basis. While
development of private sector-led export in higher debt burden. the fiscal risks of PPAs exist, the needs for
sectors, encourage FDI, and support con- Continuous expansion of the economy in additional power capacity are also evi-
sumption from still robust remittances. A upcoming years should lead to more em- dent from the consumption growth trend.
steady implementation of the reform pro- ployment opportunities and further pov- The Government is committed to review
gram will result in a further acceleration erty reduction. Employment opportunities carefully its decisions going forward,
of growth over the medium term to 5 per- outside agriculture in rural areas (in par- ensuring compliance of new PPAs with
cent by 2020, particularly by enhancing ticular) will play a critical role in leading the draft Law on Public Private Partner-
productivity. Inflation is envisaged to to significant reductions in lagging re- ships that is expected to be approved and
remain well contained, converging to the gions. Pensions and social assistance are enacted in 2018.
NBG’s target of 3 percent by year-end expected to play a much smaller role for As a very open economy, Georgia is vul-
2018, while the current account deficit poverty reduction in upcoming years, in nerable to regional developments given its
would narrow to below 9 percent of GDP contrast to the 2010-2015 period, given the historically high current account deficit,
by 2020. more limited fiscal space. and the risks of export demand and re-
Considerable consolidation of administra- mittances shock. The downside risks to
tive spending, streamlining of subsidies the baseline scenario are associated with
and a more efficient social safety net will Risks and challenges further tightening of US monetary policy
help to achieve medium-term fiscal con- and Lari depreciation; deterioration in the
solidation while providing space for capi- external environment (including due to a
tal spending. Current spending is project- Georgia’s quasi-fiscal risks emanating weaker EU outlook) and regional geopo-
ed to decline from 24.5 percent of GDP in from the contingent liabilities of the State- litical tensions.
2017 to 23 percent in 2020, primarily by Owned Enterprises (SOEs) are substantial Rural poverty and high poverty rates in
containing the wage bill and administra- and a source of vulnerability. The Fiscal lagging regions also remain a challenge.
tive expenses—which rose steadily and Risks Annex to the 2018 Budget Law sug- Providing employment opportunities and
steeply for at least 4 years—and better gests that the liabilities of the 76 high and raising agricultural productivity will be
targeting of subsidies and social assistance medium risk SOEs are around 20 percent critical to address them.
TABLE 2 Georgia / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 2.9 2.8 5.0 4.5 4.8 5.0
Private Consumption 0.1 -0.3 4.2 5.0 4.0 3.0
Government Consumption 22.1 2.8 1.3 0.8 0.0 2.8
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 11.7 8.8 -2.4 14.5 16.1 11.1
Exports, Goods and Services 6.0 -0.7 21.0 9.0 4.0 5.0
Imports, Goods and Services 10.4 -0.2 10.0 10.0 6.0 5.0
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.2 2.6 5.0 4.5 4.9 5.1
Agriculture 1.5 0.0 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.0
Industry 4.1 5.5 4.0 5.0 4.8 4.8
Services 3.1 2.1 5.6 4.5 5.1 5.3
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 4.0 2.1 6.5 3.0 3.0 3.0
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -11.9 -12.8 -8.7 -9.4 -9.1 -8.9
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 11.9 12.8 8.7 9.4 9.1 9.9
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 9.0 9.8 10.5 8.9 8.9 9.0
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -3.8 -3.9 -3.8 -3.7 -3.3 -3.0
Debt (% of GDP) 41.4 38.2 36.0 36.8 37.7 38.8
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -2.8 -2.7 -3.1 -2.9 -2.5 -2.2
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 4.0 4.2 3.7 3.4 3.0 2.7
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 16.7 17.1 15.5 14.0 12.7 11.1
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 46.7 45.5 42.6 40.2 37.6 34.9
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2016-HIS. Actual data: 2015, 2016. Nowcast: 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2016) with pass-through = 0.87 based on GDP per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 55 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 69
fund) declined by nearly US$5 billion (3
Recent developments percent of GDP).
KAZAKHSTAN The government continued to consolidate
its core fiscal accounts, but the overall fiscal
Following two years of weak growth, Ka- deficit widened to 7 percent of GDP in 2017
zakhstan’s economy recovered in 2017. as a result of the banking sector bailout.
Table 1 2017 Real GDP growth accelerated to 4 percent The government recapitalized the Problem
Population, million 18.0 in 2017, up from 1.1 percent in 2016. Oil Loans Fund with an injection of US$6.5
GDP, current US$ billion 158.2 production, which rose by 10.5 percent billion (about 4 percent of GDP) in 2017 to
GDP per capita, current US$ 8792 year on year in 2017, was the primary support the recovery of banks’ balance
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 0.4 driver of this improvement. The increase sheets; the central bank provided another
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 7.8 in oil output was observed in the oil fields US$2 billion to support ailing banks.
Gini coefficienta 26.9 that were not covered by the OPEC-led The central bank continued to implement
cuts in 2017. Together with more favora- its inflation targeting policy. As the im-
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 110.6
ble terms of trade, it generated positive pact of the 2015 currency depreciation
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 72.0 spillover effects to the manufacturing and eased, consumer price inflation halved
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. services sectors. While the agriculture from an average of 14.6 percent in 2016 to
Notes: sector contributed modestly to overall 7.4 percent in 2017. With inflation easing,
(a) Most recent value (2015), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). growth in 2017, growth of the construction the central bank cut its policy interest rate
sector slowed, largely reflecting the com- three times in 2017 and two times in early
pletion of oil transportation projects. 2018. The latest rate cut, in March 2018,
On the demand side, growth was driven lowered the policy rate to 9.5 percent.
by an improvement of net exports, high- The poverty rate (using the $5.5/day inter-
More favorable terms of trade and in- lighting oil sector expansion and the re- national poverty line) rose from 5.6 per-
creased oil production supported the eco- covery of global oil prices. cent in 2013 to a peak of 7.9 percent in
nomic recovery and an improvement in The current account deficit narrowed 2016; it is estimated to have fallen to 6.9
substantially in 2017, to 3 percent of percent in 2017. The incidence of poverty
poverty indicators in Kazakhstan in 2017.
GDP (from 6.5 percent in 2016), buoyed increased in all regions of Kazakhstan
Over the medium term, the real GDP by more favorable terms of trade. The between 2014 and 2015, the last year for
growth rate is expected to hover around improvement in the current account bal- which data are available. Poverty rates in
3 percent, as the oil sector’s contribution ance helped the tenge to strengthen by the most vulnerable southern regions
about 10 percent in real terms against more than doubled during this period,
to economic growth declines relative to
the U.S. dollar in 2017. On the financing jumping from 5.2 percent to 13.9 percent
2017 (when a structural shift in oil out- side, FDI inflows and foreign borrowing in Kyzylorda oblast and from 5 percent to
put occurred). Risks to the outlook in- by state-owned enterprises were offset 12.5 percent in Jambyl oblast.
clude a potential weakening of the exter- by short-term capital outflows. The cen- Despite the economic recovery and im-
tral bank reported an increase of assets proved consumer confidence, household
nal environment, a worsening of problems
held by residents abroad. As a result, income remained under pressure in 2017,
in the banking sector, and a missed oppor-
gross international reserves of the cen- as the labor market struggled to recover.
tunity to deepen structural reforms. tral bank and the government (in the oil Real wages and salaries declined by 2.1
FIGURE 1 Kazakhstan / Real GDP growth and contributions FIGURE 2 Kazakhstan / Actual and projected poverty rates
to real GDP growth and real GDP per capita
Percent, percentage points Povertyrate, percent Thousand, tenge
7 9 820
6 8 800
5 7 780
4 6
760
3 5
740
2 4
720
1 3
0 2 700
-1 1 680
-2 0 660
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 e 2013 2014 2015 2016 e 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Consumption Investment $5.5/day, 2011 PPP $3.2/day, 2011 PPP
Net exports Real GDP growth Real GDP per capita (RHS)
Sources: Statistical Office of Kazakhstan; World Bank staff estimates. Sources: World Bank staff estimates.
MPO 56 Apr 18
70 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
percent year on year. Although wages current account balance and fiscal oil reve- and price stability and encourage invest-
rose by 2.5 percent year on year in Asta- nue are also expected to level off. The fis- ment in the non-oil economy. Higher in-
na, the capital—and by 1.6 percent and cal position will improve gradually in the comes will also have positive spillover
1.9 percent in Pavlodar and Kostanay wake of fiscal consolidation efforts. The effects on poverty reduction.
oblasts, respectively—these gains were government is planning to cut the non-oil .
more than offset by falling real wages in fiscal deficit from over 13 percent of GDP
the rest of the country. The official unem- in 2017 to 7 percent by 2020. Risks and challenges
ployment rate remained unchanged in As the economy continues to grow, labor
2017 at 4.9 percent. income—the primary driver of poverty
reduction in Kazakhstan—is forecast to Both external and domestic factors present
return to positive real growth. As a result, risks to Kazakhstan’s medium-term eco-
Outlook the poverty rate is projected to decline to 5 nomic outlook. The economy’s vulnerabil-
percent by 2020. ity to external shocks remains the main
The successful implementation of struc- challenge to achieving stable and sustaina-
As oil output growth stabilizes from 2018 tural reforms will be required to deliver ble development. External demand from
onward, real GDP growth is expected to more sustainable and inclusive economic China and the Russian Federation, Ka-
moderate to an average annual rate of 3 growth. The ongoing structural and insti- zakhstan’s main trading partners, as well
percent through 2020. Growth in the non- tutional reforms (including those under as global oil demand and prices will re-
tradable services sector will be supported the 100 Concrete Steps program and the main the key external factors impacting
by stronger domestic demand as real in- Strategic Plan for Development of Ka- Kazakhstan’s economic performance. Do-
comes of households are expected to start zakhstan to 2025, as adopted in early 2018) mestic factors include the pace of imple-
recovering. Moreover, the planned addi- should aim to reduce the role of the state mentation of structural and institutional
tional investment in oil output expansion in the economy and facilitate the develop- reforms, especially in anticipation of a
projects will drive an increase in construc- ment of a vibrant, modern and innovative political transition over the medium term.
tion activity. tradable non-oil sector. In this context, A potential escalation of problems in the
Assuming that there are no external efforts to restructure and privatize state- banking sector is also a concern. To miti-
shocks and that the authorities continue owned enterprises would be expected to gate these risks and facilitate a sizeable
their inflation targeting regime, consumer focus on improving the efficiency of pub- expansion of the tradable non-oil sector’s
price inflation will stabilize at between 4.3 lic administration, reducing fiscal risks, role in the economy, the government must
-5.3 percent in the medium term. and open contestable spaces for the pri- demonstrate significant improvements to
As oil prices are projected to stabilize vate sector to act. Prudent fiscal and mon- the rule of law, the investment climate,
around US$60 per barrel in 2018-20, the etary policies would support economic and the quality of human capital.
TABLE 2 Kazakhstan / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 1.2 1.1 4.0 2.8 3.0 3.2
Private Consumption 1.8 1.2 1.5 1.7 2.0 2.2
Government Consumption 2.4 2.4 -2.5 -3.4 1.7 1.5
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 4.2 3.0 6.2 7.6 4.5 4.6
Exports, Goods and Services -4.1 -4.4 1.5 1.7 1.9 3.1
Imports, Goods and Services -0.1 -2.2 -6.0 1.0 2.1 2.5
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 1.9 1.2 3.9 2.8 3.0 3.2
Agriculture 3.5 5.4 2.9 3.0 3.0 3.0
Industry -0.4 1.1 6.1 2.1 2.3 3.1
Services 3.2 0.9 2.7 3.2 3.4 3.3
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 6.6 14.6 7.4 5.3 4.3 4.5
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -2.8 -6.5 -3.0 -0.6 -0.5 -0.3
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 5.2 6.9 6.1 2.6 1.8 1.7
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 1.7 10.5 6.0 5.2 4.6 4.2
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -7.9 -6.4 -7.0 -2.6 -2.4 -2.0
Debt (% of GDP) 21.9 19.6 20.7 20.9 22.4 24.6
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -7.1 -5.3 -6.1 -1.8 -1.5 -1.2
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 7.8 7.9 6.9 6.2 5.6 5.0
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2015-HBS. Actual data: 2015. Nowcast: 2016 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2015) with pass-through = 0.87 based on GDP per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 57 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 71
due to a decline in CIT collections by 7
Recent developments percent. Spending increased by 5.7 per-
KOSOVO cent, due to a 11.9 percent increase in so-
cial transfers and 5.4 percent increase in
Growth reached 4.4 percent in 2017, up capital spending. Higher actual costs than
from 4.1 percent in 2016. The upturn is planned costs for spending on veterans
Table 1 2017 driven by rise in investment, and recovery in benefits exceeded plans due to the delay
Population, million 1.8 exports. Higher private investment was driv- in the implementation of the cap on the
GDP, current US$ billion 7.1 en by FDI inflows, thanks to higher growth scheme. In addition, goods and services
GDP per capita, current US$ 3902 in Europe, low interest rates, and a better spending rose by 10.7 percent due to early
School enrollment, primary (% gross)a n.a. business environment as Kosovo improved elections and creation of two additional
Life expectancy at birth, yearsa 71.3 its rank from 60 to 40 in Doing Business. ministries. Public and publicly guaranteed
Investment contributed 3pp to economic debt remains on a rising trajectory, reach-
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. growth, with public investment increasing ing 15.8 percent of GDP at end-2017.
Notes:
by 5 percent y-o-y. The recovery in goods The current account deficit (CAD) improved
(a) Most recent WDI value (2015). exports was led by a rebound in commodity to 5.1 percent of GDP in 2017, from 8.2 per-
prices with a broad-based increase in vol- cent in 2016, thanks to better external condi-
umes of goods exports, albeit from a low tions and increase in export volumes. Ex-
base, and a surge in the export of services. ports of goods jumped up by 23.1 percent y-o
Net exports contributed a 1.1pp while the -y in 2017 due to higher growth of the trad-
contribution of consumption was only 0.4pp. ing partners, and higher global prices of base
The economy grew at 4.4 percent in
In terms of economic sectors, construction, metals. Exports of services grew by 17.7 per-
2017, up from 4.1 in 2016. The accelera- trade, financial and transport were the main cent in 2017, mainly due to higher travel
tion was due to a pickup in investment engine of growth in 2017 with a contribution expenditures by the diaspora.
and a recovery in exports. Stronger of 2.6 pp. Agriculture remained stagnant, Higher growth continued to foster job crea-
whereas industry contributed 0.7pp. tion in 2017. Employment grew by 1.2pp y-o-
growth fostered job creation in 2017,
Consumer price inflation was 1.5 percent y in the third quarter of 2017, however, as
supporting poverty reduction; but labor in 2017 y-o-y, up from 0.3 percent in 2016, labor force participation expanded further,
force participation remains low. The as prices for fuel, food, tobacco, alcohol, unemployment increased by 2.7 pp. Despite
outlook is positive, with 4.8 percent and other household items increased add- the recent improvements, employment is still
ing to the cost of living. low at 29.7 percent on average as a share of
annual growth projected between 2018-
Higher revenues (up 5.3 percent y-o-y) total population. The share of self-employed
2020, driven by investment and con-
and under-execution of public invest- and unpaid family workers, i.e. those in vul-
sumption. Risks to the outlook include ments narrowed the fiscal deficit to 1.4 nerable employment and measures job quali-
the ability to execute the public invest- percent of GDP in 2017, lower than the ty, remains high at 23 percent; the youth
ment program, metal price dynamics earlier projected 2 percent of GDP. Indi- unemployment rate slightly increased reach-
rect tax revenues grew by 6.1 percent ing 53.3 percent in Q3 2017. The duration of
and the fragile political situation.
(VAT by 8.1 percent), while non-tax reve- unemployment is worrying with over 70
nues grew by 5.6 percent y-o-y. Direct tax percent of the unemployed seeking a job for
revenues added only 2.5 percent growth, over a year.
FIGURE 1 Kosovo / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Kosovo / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real private consumption per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
8.0% 30 3000
6.0%
25 2500
4.0%
20 2000
2.0%
15 1500
0.0%
-2.0% 10 1000
-4.0% 5 500
-6.0%
0 0
2014 2015 2016 2017
2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Consumption Investments
International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
Net exports Real GDP growth Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: Statistics Agency of Kosovo and WB Staff. Sources: World Bank. Notes: see Table 2.
MPO 58 Apr 18
72 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
The CAD is expected to reach 6 percent of growth in Europe and other trading part-
Outlook GDP in 2018. Increased demand for in- ners pose risks to the outlook.
vestment goods is expected to widen the Perceived fragility of the government,
CAD in 2018, despite higher exports pro- with only 61 out of 120 votes in the parlia-
Economic growth is projected at 4.8 per- jected. Net FDI and remittances, are ex- ment, can slow down the implementation
cent in 2018-2020, propelled by higher pected to finance larger shares of the CAD of public projects through the investment
capital spending. Growth in public invest- as growth in Europe firms up and larger clause. In addition, the delay in fiscal re-
ment is expected to be driven by several implementation of the Stabilization and forms such as the implementation of the
projects under preparation, including the Association Agreement. cap on the war veteran’s benefits, further
railway project and regional roads fi- Poverty, measured at the lower middle- increases in untargeted categorical social
nanced by IFIs. Private investment is ex- income poverty line (US$ 3.2/day, 2011 benefits, and unfunded early retirement
pected to increase reflecting improve- PPP), is expected to decline slightly to 2.55 schemes increase fiscal pressures.
ments in the business environment, and in 2018, from 2.6 percent in 2017 driven by Reform priorities should include shifting
increase in credit due to the partial credit stronger growth. High unemployment sources of growth towards tradable sec-
guarantee fund for SMEs established in and inactivity rates remain the key imped- tors and increasing productivity to ad-
2017. Higher wages and social spending, iments to sustainable poverty reduction. dress high unemployment, low participa-
growth in remittances and credit to house- tion rates, and poverty.
holds are expected to promote household
consumption adding an additional 2.3 pp Risks and challenges
to growth. Exports are likely to benefit
from robust growth in Europe and higher
base metal prices. However, net exports Kosovo’s outlook is positive, but the risks
are projected to subtract 0.9 pp from are tilted to the downside. Lower than
growth in 2018 because of higher imports projected absorption of public investment,
linked to public investment projects. lower base metal prices and slower
TABLE 2 Kosovo / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 4.1 4.1 4.4 4.8 4.8 4.8
Private Consumption 4.3 5.7 0.3 2.0 2.5 2.2
Government Consumption -6.5 -6.3 1.0 4.5 1.5 3.3
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 12.1 7.3 11.3 12.1 11.8 10.5
Exports, Goods and Services 1.9 7.5 15.6 8.3 7.9 7.7
Imports, Goods and Services 3.8 7.0 5.1 5.9 5.9 5.3
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.0 2.4 4.5 3.6 5.1 5.0
Agriculture -4.1 3.1 3.7 6.6 8.4 6.2
Industry 5.9 1.8 3.8 -0.5 5.8 4.5
Services 3.0 2.6 5.1 5.4 3.9 4.9
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) -0.5 0.3 1.5 1.7 1.7 1.7
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -8.6 -8.2 -5.1 -6.0 -7.0 -7.5
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -1.8 -1.3 -1.4 -2.2 -3.0 -3.3
Debt (% of GDP) 12.7 14.1 15.8 16.6 18.6 20.9
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -1.5 -1.0 -1.1 -1.9 -2.6 -2.9
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
MPO 59 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 73
exports, which benefited from the recov-
Recent developments ery in regional demand as well as im-
KYRGYZ proved compliance by Kyrgyz producers
with Eurasian Economic Union (EEU)
REPUBLIC The Kyrgyz economy has recovered from quality standards. Imports are estimated
the external shocks of 2014-15 as growth to have risen by 12% (in US dollar terms),
accelerated to 4.5% in 2017, from 3.8% a a slower increase than might have been
year earlier. Growth was driven by the envisaged given the improvement in re-
non-gold industry (22%) while it deceler- mittances and high levels of public invest-
Table 1 2017
ated in other main sectors: gold, construc- ment. The current account deficit was fi-
Population, million 6.2
tion, agriculture and services. On the de- nanced by FDI and government borrow-
GDP, current US$ billion 7.2
mand side, growth was supported by ing. International reserves increased
GDP per capita, current US$ 1160 public investment, net exports and private slightly to US$2.1 billion, covering about 4
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 1.4 consumption fueled by a steady rebound months of imports.
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 19.1 in remittances inflows. The stronger balance of payments (and
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 67.1 An expansionary fiscal stance was main- corresponding foreign exchange liquidity
Gini coefficienta 26.8 tained, even as external tailwinds strength- in the economy) led to a further apprecia-
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 107.4 ened. The estimated overall fiscal deficit tion of the Kyrgyz som by 0.6% in 2017
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 70.7 was 5% of GDP in 2017, down from 6.6% (8.8% in 2016). In real effective terms,
in 2016 and lower than the budgeted defi- however, the som depreciated by 0.5%,
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. cit of 7.5%, but still above the levels of pre- largely reflecting relative inflation dynam-
Notes:
(a) Most recent value (2016), 2011 PPPs. vious years. Both tax and non-tax revenues ics with key trading partners.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). increased as a share of GDP. In addition, Inflation rose slightly in 2017 reaching
the budget received rising grant support 3.7%, given buoyant domestic demand.
from international donors. At the same With inflation still below the National
time, expenditures increased, driven large- Bank (NBKR) target of 5-7%, monetary
ly by capital outlays. Substantial overruns policy remained accommodative. Econom-
In 2017, growth was stronger than ex-
in current spending in the first part of the ic activity was supported by a recovery in
pected, supported by external tailwinds, year were partially mitigated by expendi- credit to the economy (14% growth), fol-
the expansionary macroeconomic policy ture restraint in the last quarter of 2017. lowing a decline early in the year.
stance, which buoyed domestic demand, The deficit was mainly financed by foreign The poverty rate (measured at below
borrowing, which increased total public US$3.2 per day, 2011 PPP terms) is esti-
and a better-than-expected (albeit weak-
debt to 63.2% of GDP from 61.4% in 2016. mated to have fallen to 19% in 2016. Low
ening) performance in the gold sector. The current account deficit is estimated to consumer price growth and higher re-
Going forward, growth is projected to have narrowed to 9.4% of GDP in 2017 mittance inflows supported household
decline slightly in 2018, before picking- from 12.1% a year before, as exports consumption. At the same time, moderate
picked-up (+14.5% in US dollar terms) and growth in services and agriculture, where
up to 5% over the medium term, allow-
remittances continued to grow (by 24.2% about 50% of the bottom 40 are employed,
ing for continued moderate declines in in US dollar terms). The export perfor- constrained real labor income growth for
the poverty rate. mance was driven mainly by non-gold the poor.
FIGURE 1 Kyrgyz Republic / Real GDP growth and FIGURE 2 Kyrgyz Republic / Actual and projected poverty
contributions to real GDP growth rates and real GDP growth per capita
Percentage points Percent Percent of population Percent
6 6 40 12
5 5 35 10
4 30
4 8
3 25
3 6
2 20
2 4
1 15
0 1 10 2
-1 0 5 0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
0 -2
Agriculture Industry w/out Kumtor
2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
Kumtor Construction
Services GDP (RHS) GDP growth, RHS $3.2/day PPP, LHS
Sources: Kyrgyz authorities and WB staff calculations. Sources: Kyrgyz authorities and WB staff calculations.
MPO 60 Apr 18
74 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
The fiscal deficit is projected to decline to
Outlook 2.9% of GDP by 2020. This will be achieved Risks and challenges
through measures to increase tax revenues
and curtail current spending, while capital
Real GDP growth is projected to deceler- expenditures would remain robust at about The outlook is subject to downside risks.
ate slightly to 4.2% in 2018 -as industrial 7.6% of GDP on average (although falling to Growth will continue to be highly de-
output growth moderates- and then pick 6.1% in 2020 as externally financed projects pendent on exogenous regional develop-
up to reach 5% by 2020. This scenario as- decline). Over 2018-20, tax revenues should ments. Specifically, a slowdown in Russia
sumes that recovery takes hold in Russia increase as a share of GDP, with measures and Kazakhstan could affect negatively
and Kazakhstan, benefiting the Kyrgyz to: (i) expand the tax base by encouraging the baseline scenario via remittances and
economy via the traditional remittance businesses to formalize, (ii) improve the trade. Adverse exchange rate develop-
and trade channels. An additional boost is administration of taxes, (iii) reduce tax ex- ments could heighten competition in the
expected to come from exports, thanks to emptions, and (iv) increase some tax rates. domestic and EEU markets.
a number of developments, which in- Over the same period, expenses are target- A core challenge continues to be to accel-
clude: (i) enhanced access to the EEU mar- ed to decline by over 5 percentage points erate the process of convergence of local
ket; and (ii) improved bilateral relations (from 38.7% in 2018) as a result of efforts to production to EEU standards. This would
with Uzbekistan, which should lead to (i) streamline non-priority purchases of help Kyrgyz producers to boost exports of
higher trade between the two countries. goods and services, (ii) reduce the wage bill agricultural and textile products in the
These effects should mitigate the antici- as a share of GDP, and (iii) strengthen pub- short and medium run.
pated moderation of public expenditure. lic procurement. Another challenge will be to bring fis-
Inflation is envisaged to remain in line Modest increases in growth in agriculture cal policy back to a sustainable path,
with the NBKR target, assuming no sig- and construction, and a solid performance of while continuing to provide adequate
nificant global food price increases and remittances, are likely to support rural pov- support to the economy. Several policy
relative exchange rate stability. erty reduction. Social transfers will continue decisions taken in the run-up to the
While remittance inflows are expected to to play an important role in driving poverty Presidential elections in October 2017
grow further, the current account deficit reduction in both urban and rural areas. A are expected to add structural pressure
is projected to remain elevated at around scheduled increase in pensions should also on spending, including a universal ex-
10% of GDP, reflecting structural fea- benefit poor households given that pensions tension of the previously income-
tures of the economy and continued represent close to 15% of income among the targeted benefit for low income families
high, albeit gradually moderating, levels poor. The poverty rate is projected to decline with children, which will complicate
of public investment. to 18.5% in 2018 and 16.7% in 2020. the task of fiscal consolidation.
TABLE 2 Kyrgyz Republic / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 3.9 3.8 4.5 4.2 4.8 5.0
Private Consumption -0.9 1.8 1.9 2.8 3.6 4.0
Government Consumption 0.9 2.7 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.5
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 3.9 3.7 4.0 4.9 5.7 6.0
Exports, Goods and Services -5.6 2.2 5.6 8.4 8.5 8.9
Imports, Goods and Services -13.2 -4.0 0.0 2.7 3.3 4.4
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.9 3.8 4.5 4.2 4.8 5.0
Agriculture 6.2 3.0 2.2 2.7 2.2 2.2
Industry 2.9 5.9 10.3 6.8 8.9 9.8
Services 2.6 3.7 4.2 4.3 5.2 5.1
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 6.5 0.4 3.6 4.0 4.0 4.0
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -15.8 -12.1 -9.4 -11.0 -10.7 -9.8
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 17.4 9.7 7.2 11.0 10.7 9.8
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 15.1 8.1 6.9 7.0 7.0 6.5
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -3.0 -6.6 -5.0 -4.1 -4.4 -2.9
Debt (% of GDP) 67.3 61.4 63.2 63.5 63.7 63.4
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -2.0 -5.6 -4.1 -2.5 -3.3 -2.2
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 2.5 1.4 1.0 0.8 0.5 0.4
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 23.2 19.1 18.5 18.0 17.4 16.7
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 69.9 67.1 66.1 65.1 63.9 62.6
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2009-KIHS, 2015-KIHS, and 2016-KIHS. Actual data: 2015, 2016. Nowcast: 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using average elasticity (2009-2015) with pass-through = 0.7 based on GDP per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 61 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 75
grew by 2.4 percent y-o-y in 2017, helped
Recent developments in part by employment subsidies in the
MACEDONIA first part of the year, through which al-
most third of the net new jobs were creat-
The political turmoil of 2015-2017 slowed ed. The employment rate has been con-
real GDP growth in 2017 from 2.9 percent stantly improving, but remains low at 44
Table 1 2017 in 2016 to zero percent in 2017, driven by a percent, meaning that more than half of
Population, million 2.1 fall in investments. The inauguration of the working age population is either un-
GDP, current US$ billion 11.3 the new government in June 2017 resolved employed or outside of the labor force.
GDP per capita, current US$ 5440 the stalemate as evidenced by the compa- Most of the jobs created were in wholesale
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 5.3 nies’ improved expectations on future and retail trade, accommodation and food
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 9.8 production. Investment fell by 4.5 percent services and manufacturing—the latter
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 23.2 y-o-y in 2017, but it started recovering by sectors with links to the FDI-economy,
year-end with recovering investor confi- which benefit from tax exemptions and
Gini coefficienta 35.6 dence. Private consumption was the only other government support. As a result, the
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 93.2 contributor to growth in 2017, supported unemployment rate fell to a historical low,
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 75.5 by higher employment and wages. Net- at 22.4 percent in 2017, close to 80 percent
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. exports contributed negatively to growth of which is long-term.
Notes: (-0.7 pp). Solid exports growth was pro- Poverty is estimated to have continued
(a) Most recent value (2015), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). pelled by the recovery in the Euro area but declining in 2017. Poverty (at US$5.5/day
was not enough to compensate for rising at 2011 PPP) is projected to have fallen to
imports for energy, FDI-related imports, 21 percent in 2017, continuing a decreas-
and iron and steel. At the sector level, ing trend present since 2009. Employment
As investment contracted after a pro- construction and manufacturing stalled in growth and increases in salaries, especial-
longed political crisis, economic growth 2017, with construction falling by almost ly in the labor-intensive sectors, are ex-
14 percent y-o-y in real terms as both pri- pected to have driven most of the poverty
slowed to zero percent in 2017. Growth is
vate and public construction activities reduction in 2017. Pensions, which played
projected to rise to 2.3 percent in 2018,
stalled. Mining, wholesale and retail trade a role in the 2009-2014 decrease, are un-
driven by consumption and recovering and agriculture were the only sectors that likely to have played a relevant role in
investment. Despite the slowdown, labor contributed positively to growth, support- recent poverty dynamics.
market improved thanks to public subsi- ed by rising metal prices, growth in dis- Revenue gains in 2017 were offset by in-
posable income and a favorable harvest creases in spending, resulting in un-
dies; but employment and labor force
season, respectively. changed fiscal deficit—at 2.7 percent of
participation rates remain low compared Inflation remained low in 2017 at 1.4 per- GDP. Revenues increased on the back of
to the EU. The fiscal deficit remained cent, although it increased from a 2016 de- solid VAT and collection of the social se-
unchanged in 2017, with higher spend- flation, driven by rising prices of food and curity contributions, while expenditures
beverages, energy (including oil), clothing increased due to higher spending for
ing offsetting improved tax collection.
and footwear and communications. health, pensions, and subsidies. Capital
Poverty continued to decline in 2017,
Despite slower growth, there were improve- spending once again remained under-
propelled by job creation. ments in the labor market. Employment executed reflecting a slowdown in project
FIGURE 1 Macedonia / Real GDP growth and contributions FIGURE 2 Macedonia / Annual and projected poverty rates
to real GDP growth and real GDP per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty headcount GDPper capita (USD 2011 PPP)
6 50 35.1 16,000
4 45 32.5 32.2 14,000
40 29.7 28.9
12,000
02 33 05 24.8 23.2 21.7 21.4 20.5 19.3 10,000
25 8,000
-2 20 6,000
-4 11 05 9.7 10.4 9.9 7.5 6.2 4.9 5.3 5.2 5.0 4.9 4.8 4,000
5 2,000
-6
2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 f 2019 f 0 0
20092010201120122013201420152016201720182019
Final consumption Gross capital formation
Net exports Real growth $1.9/day $5.5/day GDP per capita
Sources: FYR Macedonia State Statistics Office and World Bank staff calculations. Sources: WDI and own calculations based on SILC 2010-2015.
MPO 62 Apr 18
76 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
implementation. Public and publicly guar- imports and were further replenished in Fiscal deficit is planned to remain un-
anteed debt declined to 47.5 percent in January 2018 as the Government issued a changed in 2018 leading to rise in public
2017, from 48.4 percent in 2016, but due to 7-year EUR 500 million Eurobond at 2.75 debt to 50 percent of GDP.
a drawdown on accumulated deposits to percent which fully covers government
reduce new borrowing. borrowing requirements for 2018.
Credit growth increased in 2017. House- Risks and challenges
hold credit grew by 9.2 percent, while
corporate lending remained subdued Outlook
throughout 2017 (2.6 percent). The loan-to With the political crisis now resolved, the
-deposit ratio stood at 88 percent, which main risk comes from fiscal vulnerabilities
should allow banks to expand lending The economic outlook is positive, with and low potential growth. A low revenue
activities. Non-performing loans (NPLs) growth expected to average 2.7 percent to GDP ratio, a growing deficit in the pen-
stood at 6.3 percent, similar to 6.4 percent during 2018-2020. Construction activity is sion system, higher interest payments,
at end-2016, but corporate NPLs increased expected to recover, as the construction of and accumulated arrears are risks to fiscal
slightly to 9.9 percent. two highways is resumed. The manufac- sustainability. Discussions about raising
The current account deficit narrowed to turing sector is also expected to recover, a untargeted social transfers compound the
1.1 percent of GDP in 2017. Solid export process that began in late 2017, propelled sustainability concerns.
performance of FDIs, iron and steel, furni- by improved foreign demand from the Credible fiscal consolidation program
ture and tobacco helped to reduce the EU. Private consumption is projected to focused on strengthening efficiency of
goods and services deficit to 13.9 percent rise supported by higher employment and public spending and broadening of the tax
of GDP (from 15 percent in 2016). Net as the new authorities indicated rise in base would help to stabilize public debt,
private transfer inflows increased slightly social transfers. rebuild fiscal buffers against future shocks
to 15.8 percent of GDP, while primary Poverty is likely to continue its down- and increase investor confidence.
income deficit widened further to 4.2 per- ward trend in 2018-2020 with improved Ensuring the backward linkages of the
cent of GDP as foreign investors kept re- economic outlook. Public investment in FDIs, unlocking potentials in the energy,
patriating profits amidst the political tur- infrastructure should sustain employ- tourism and agriculture sectors, as well
moil. Foreign direct investments declined ment creation. Increases in social transfers as reducing the overregulation in pro-
in 2017 to only 2.3 percent of GDP, com- should also translate into further poverty fessional and infrastructure network
pared to 3.2 percent in 2016. At end-2017, reductions, if properly designed and services could help increasing the poten-
foreign reserves stood at 4.4 months of means-tested. tial growth.
TABLE 2 Macedonia / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 3.9 2.9 0.0 2.3 2.7 3.0
Private Consumption 4.4 3.1 2.9 2.2 1.9 1.9
Government Consumption 3.9 1.9 -1.5 2.1 1.5 1.5
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 2.1 -3.9 -4.5 0.9 3.3 4.7
Exports, Goods and Services 8.5 8.1 9.2 5.4 6.3 6.3
Imports, Goods and Services 9.9 11.6 7.3 3.6 4.2 4.2
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 5.0 3.7 -0.8 4.1 2.6 2.9
Agriculture 1.9 2.8 4.1 0.9 1.2 1.2
Industry 6.2 6.1 -7.8 16.4 5.1 5.1
Services 4.9 2.7 1.7 -0.5 1.6 2.1
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) -0.3 -0.2 1.4 1.6 2.0 2.0
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -1.9 -2.8 -1.1 -2.5 -2.5 -2.6
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 1.8 2.6 1.0 6.7 2.2 2.4
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 2.3 3.3 2.2 2.6 2.9 3.1
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -3.6 -2.7 -2.7 -2.7 -2.5 -2.3
Debt (% of GDP) 38.1 39.6 39.3 43.3 44.4 45.5
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -2.4 -1.5 -1.4 -1.2 -0.9 -0.5
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 5.3 5.2 5.0 5.0 4.8 4.8
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 9.8 9.7 9.6 9.3 9.2 9.2
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 23.2 21.9 21.0 20.6 20.5 20.2
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on SILC harmonization, using 2015-SILC grouped data (survey year). Actual data: 2015. Nowcast: 2016 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2015) with pass-through = 0.7 based on Private consumption per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 63 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 77
The increasing real wages and a recover-
Recent developments ing flow of remittances, as well as the
MOLDOVA favorable 2016 harvest have been associ-
ated with a downward trend in the pov-
Growth reached 4.5 percent in 2017 on ac- erty headcount, which, measured at the
count of strong consumption led by the international moderate poverty thresh-
Table 1 2017 ongoing recovery in remittances and in- old of US$ 5.5/day in 2011 PPP, de-
Population, million 3.5 creases in real wages. A double-digit in- creased to 16.3 percent in 2015 from 18.4
GDP, current US$ billion 8.2 crease in public investments stimulated in 2014, and continued decreasing in
GDP per capita, current US$ 2307 gross fixed capital formation (+5.1 percent). 2016. The unemployment rate fell form
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 0.2 Despite robust exports supported by the 4.9 percent in 2015 to 4.2 percent in 2016,
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 1.3 good harvest of the past two years, imports the decline being particularly pro-
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 16.5 increased rapidly resulting in a negative nounced in rural areas (0.9 percentage
contribution of net exports to growth (-2.7 points), where the incidence of poverty
Gini coefficienta 26.3 percentage points). On the production side, is higher. Salaries increased by a further
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 92.4 growth has been mainly driven by the re- 5.2 percent in real terms in 2017, sup-
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 71.4 tail and wholesale trade (+1.3 percentage porting household welfare.
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. points), followed by growth in agriculture The external position remains stable, de-
Notes: (+1 percentage points) and industry (+0.4 spite a recent increase in current account
(a) Most recent value (2016), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). percentage points). deficit. In the first nine months of 2017,
After a sharp deceleration in 2016, the in- exports increased in nominal terms by
flation rate averaged 6.6 percent in 2017, 25.2 percent, remittances increased by 12.1
just above the target corridor of 5 percent percent, while net direct investments in-
In 2017, Moldova registered robust growth +/- 1.5 percent. Increases in regulated pric- creased 1.2 percentage points of GDP
supported by favorable conditions in agri- es, unfavorable climatic conditions in compared to end-2016, on account of rein-
Spring which affected seasonal agricultur- vested profits, reaching 2.5 percent of
culture and strong private consumption.
al outputs, and stronger internal demand GDP. Yet, supported by a stronger Leu
Higher wages and the recovery of re- accelerated the inflation rate, which has and imports of electricity, imports in-
mittances brought poverty rate down. been out of the target corridor since April creased (+22.5 percent y/y), determining
Growth momentum is expected to be pre- 2017. To stimulate credit activity and ab- the widening of the current account deficit
sorb the existing liquidity after the bank- by 3.4 percentage points y/y reaching 9.2
served during 2018 and 2019 supported by
ing crisis, throughout 2017, the NBM grad- percent of GDP. The current account defi-
growing consumption and investments,
ually reduced the base interest rate (from 9 cit continues to be financed predominant-
particularly public. While Moldova rebuilt percent to 6.5 percent), while increasing ly through external debt. As of end-
its macroeconomic buffers, major policy the reserve requirement ratio to a record September 2017, total external debt grew
challenges related to upcoming elections, high of 40 percent. Strong foreign inflows by 8.1 percent totaling 83 percent of GDP.
pushed the appreciation of the Moldovan Against this background, by end-January
governance, particularly in the financial
Leu, tempering the cost-push inflation 2018 foreign reserves reached an all-time
sector, to the efficiency of public spending, pressures. By end-January 2018, the infla- record of 2.9 billion USD, covering more
and to revenue mobilization remain. tion rate registered 6.5 percent y/y. than 5 months of imports.
FIGURE 1 Moldova / Actual and projected GDP growth and FIGURE 2 Moldova / Actual and projected poverty rates and
current account balance real private consumption per capita
Percent Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
9.4
10 100 12000
7.1 6.8
5 4.8 4.5 4.5 3.8 3.7 3.5 80 10000
8000
60
0
6000
-0.7 -0.4
40
-5 4000
-6.0 20 2000
-10
Real GDP, % change 0 0
Current Account Balance, % GDP 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
-15 International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: National authorities and World Bank estimates. Sources: World Bank. Notes: see Table 2.
MPO 64 Apr 18
78 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
Following two years of tight fiscal poli- plans to increase public investments, with poverty headcount, measured at the inter-
cies, a lower than expected deficit was a focus on the road sector. Still, structural national moderate poverty threshold of
registered in 2017, as fiscal revenues out- weaknesses will contain growth at around $5.5/day is projected to decline from 16.3
paced the double-digit increase in expend- 3.5 percent. As consumption and imports percent in 2015 to 12.7 percent in 2018 and
itures. Following the under execution in strengthen, the current account deficit is 11.7 percent in 2019.
2016, public spending increased 12.5 per- expected to gradually increase, but to re-
cent y/y. Supported by a strong increase in main below its historical average thanks
fiscal revenues and better compliance, to revitalization of foreign inflows. The Risks and challenges
public revenues increased 16.2 percent y/ inflation rate is expected to reach the low-
y. Buoyant foreign trade was also reflected er bound of the target corridor in 2018 due
in strong collections of VAT (+15.8 per- to base effects and lower regulated prices After two years of good climatic condi-
cent, y/y) and excises (+30.9 percent, y/y). and to gradually increasing to the target tions, extreme weather may affect agricul-
As a result, the fiscal deficit was 2.2 per- of 5 percent in medium term. In the base- tural output with consequences for overall
centage points higher, totaling -0.8 percent line scenario, fiscal deficits are projected to growth. The banking sector has stabilized,
of GDP. remain under control. Due to mandated yet it is important to continue reforms and
indexation and valorization of pensions, strengthen the transparency in the sector.
wage increases and additional public capi- Moreover, the increased demand (+30 per-
Outlook tal investments, expenditures will increase cent in the first half of 2017) observed for
reaching about 3 percent of GDP in 2018. the unregulated and poorly monitored non
The factors underlying a favorable growth -banking financial intermediation sector
Growth is expected to be robust and reach forecast similarly suggest a further decline raises concerns. Weaker growth of key
3.8% in 2018 and 3.7% in 2019 but remain in the poverty headcount during the pro- trade partners and potential changes in
below the historical averages (of 4.6%). In jection period, following the trend from international trade and migration relations
the medium-term the recovery in re- recent years. Increases in real wages and could undermine exports and remittance
mittances together with private wage remittances, as well as a good harvest year flows. While the authorities have made
growth will sustain private consumption, should support household welfare, inclu- efforts to reduce macroeconomic risks, fast-
which will remain a key driver of growth. sively in rural areas, where the incidence er growth is necessary to converge with EU
Import growth will outpace export of poverty remains higher. The rate of countries. For this to happen, Moldova
growth, leading to a negative contribution wage increases according to latest data needs deep transformational reforms that
of net trade to GDP growth. With parlia- from Q3 of 2017 suggests that on an annu- will create new and better jobs in the pri-
mentary elections in November 2018, after al basis wages in agriculture increased vate sector and consequently will create
a prolonged contraction, the Government faster than in the economy overall. The space for public investment needs.
TABLE 2 Moldova / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices -0.4 4.5 4.5 3.8 3.7 3.5
Private Consumption -2.3 4.0 4.9 3.8 3.6 3.5
Government Consumption 0.2 -0.1 0.2 0.7 -0.1 0.2
Gross Fixed Capital Investment -3.3 -2.1 5.2 6.1 5.3 5.8
Exports, Goods and Services 2.9 8.7 12.7 2.2 3.9 5.1
Imports, Goods and Services -4.7 5.2 11.4 2.9 4.1 5.3
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices -0.3 5.3 4.0 2.4 3.1 3.1
Agriculture -13.4 18.0 7.9 1.1 2.3 3.5
Industry 3.5 2.6 3.0 3.8 4.6 5.4
Services 3.8 1.8 2.7 2.5 2.9 2.2
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 9.7 6.4 6.6 3.5 4.5 5.0
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -7.2 -4.2 -8.0 -4.8 -5.2 -5.6
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 8.0 2.9 4.7 4.2 4.7 5.1
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 3.5 1.3 2.6 2.7 3.3 3.4
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -2.2 -1.8 -0.8 -3.0 -2.5 -2.2
Debt (% of GDP) 46.4 43.8 38.9 39.2 38.7 38.1
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -1.5 -0.7 0.3 -2.1 -1.6 -1.3
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 1.4 1.3 0.9 0.6 0.4 0.3
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 16.3 16.5 15.0 13.6 12.3 11.2
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2011-HBS and 2016-HBS. Actual data: 2015, 2016. Nowcast: 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using annualized elasticity (2011-2016) with pass-through = 0.87 based on private consumption per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 65 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 79
points--first such decline since late 2013,
Recent developments due to agriculture, mining industry, retail
MONTENEGRO and real estate. While the registered un-
employment rate increased to above 22
The economy grew by 4.3 percent in 2017. percent in 2017, given the large informali-
Investment made the strongest contribu- ty (one out of three jobs), the survey-based
Table 1 2017 tion to growth at 5 percentage points (pp), unemployment rate shows a decline by
Population, million 0.6 as the construction of the Bar-Boljare over 1 pp, to 16.1 percent by September
GDP, current US$ billion 4.7 highway and residential construction 2017 (a four-quarter average). Survey-
GDP per capita, current US$ 7528 accelerated. Consumption also grew, con- based employment rate grew by one per-
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 4.8 tributing an additional 3.7 percentage centage point to 45.9 percent along with
Gini coefficienta 31.9 points, supported by employment and the activity rate, albeit at a slower pace.
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 94.3 wage growth. Net exports continued to Poverty is estimated to have declined in
contribute negatively to growth, but in the past few years as economic growth
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 76.9
2017 subtracted less from growth due to a picked up and social transfers surged. In
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. record tourism season and a pickup in 2017, however, it was difficult to achieve
Notes:
(a) Most recent value (2014), 2011 PPPs. goods exports from the metal industry, significant poverty reduction given the
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). driven by improved EU demand. Due to withdrawal of the mothers’ benefit in the
high import content, the growth impact of second half of the year. Additionally, led
the higher investment for highway con- by public sector wage dynamics, real
struction is subdued. gross wages declined by 0.4 percent in
Credit growth increased by close to 12 2017. Poverty (measured as consumption
Economic growth accelerated in 2017 due percent in 2017, as household lending below the standardized middle-income-
to surge in investment led by the highway surged, amid subdued corporate lending. country poverty line of $5.5/day in 2011
construction and a historically strong NPLs declined to 7 percent of total loans, PPP terms) declined from 8.7 percent in
supported by relaxed voluntary financial 2012 to an estimated 4.4 percent in 2017.
tourism season. Employment increased
restructuring rules. Current account deficit Inflation picked up in 2017 to 2.4 percent
continuing four years of growth. Howev- further widened to 18.9 percent of GDP in on the back of rise in excises on tobacco,
er, unemployment remains high amid 2017 on the back of rising construction- alcohol and sugary drinks, and spillovers
high informality and increased labor im- related imports and despite rise in exports from international oil and food price. Due
of metals, mineral ore sales, and tourism. to the increase in the VAT rate from 19 to
ports. Labor force participation increased
Net FDI inflows increased to 11.2 percent 21 percent, and excises on tobacco and
slightly led by male activation. While
of GDP, financing two-thirds of the CAD. alcohol, inflation increased by 2.6 percent
fiscal consolidation efforts are underway, Still, after a decline in 2016 to 160 percent, yoy in January 2018.
led by tax changes, high deficit and public external debt increased again in 2017 to an Government launched an ambitious fiscal
debt require continued efforts. The im- estimated 162 percent of GDP and remains consolidation program in 2017 reducing
the highest in the region. the deficit by one percentage point of
proved credit rating outlook is providing
Robust growth led to employment rise by GDP in 2017 compared to a no-reform
easier access to capital market. 2.5 percent in 2017; however, it slowed scenario. By December, tax revenues in-
down in the last quarter by 0.2 percentage creased by over 9 percent y-o-y led by
FIGURE 1 Montenegro / Real GDP growth and contributions FIGURE 2 Montenegro / Actual and projected poverty rates
to real GDP growth and real private consumption per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
10 12 3000
8
6 10 2500
4
2 8 2000
0
6 1500
-2
-4
4 1000
-6
-8
2 500
-10
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018f
0 0
Final consumption Gross fixed capital formation 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
Change in inventories Net exports
GDP growth Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: MONSTAT, World Bank. Sources: World Bank (see notes to Table 2).
MPO 66 Apr 18
80 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
improved collection of VAT and excises. investment will slow down as the high- construction is completed in 2019, growth
Spending increased by close to 12 percent way construction gets to its closure, its will slow unless productivity gains and
on the back of tripled capital budget. On contribution to growth will remain strong new private sector investments realize.
the other hand, wage reduction and abol- in 2018. Current imbalances are likely to Large fiscal deficit and growing public
ishment of the mothers’ benefit from the stay high given the import dependence of debt call for the decisive implementation
second half of 2017 helped decelerate the current growth pattern. of the recently adopted fiscal consolida-
growth of the wage bill and social trans- Inflation is projected at 2.5 percent in the tion program. The fiscal framework that
fers. Consequently, general government period 2018-19, as the VAT rate rise adds aims to have a balanced budget by 2019,
deficit increased from 3.1 percent in 2016 to the current inflation growth in 2018. from over 5 percent deficit in 2017, will
to an estimated 5.2 percent of GDP in Fiscal deficit is projected to be brought require credible spending consolidation in
2017. Public debt including guarantees down to 3.2 percent in 2018, and slowly wage bill, social transfers, and operational
increased to 74 percent of GDP by end- reaching surplus by 2020. costs to put public deficit and debt on a
2017. After the initial fiscal consolidation With the potential poverty impact of fiscal sustainable trajectory.
efforts, outlook on the credit rating of B+ consolidation measures, in 2018 poverty is External imbalances are still high, adding
improved to stable. This has allowed easi- expected to slightly increase as mothers’ to an already high external vulnerability.
er access to capital market for a regular benefits phase out. Poverty is likely to Enhancing policy predictability and accel-
refinancing of liabilities coming due in resume its decline in 2019-20 to an esti- erating the pace of structural reforms,
2018 and 2019-2021. mated 4.4 percent by 2020, subject to im- would be needed for their moderation.
provements in private sector employment Reducing unemployment, especially for
and earnings. youth and mitigating short-term poverty
Outlook and social impacts of fiscal consolidation
and facilitating access to employment
Risks and challenges need to be an important part of the poli-
The economy is expected to grow by an cy agenda.
average of 2.5 percent annually in 2018-20
on the back of public investments and The positive economic outlook faces high,
personal consumption. While growth of but moderating risks. As the highway
TABLE 2 Montenegro / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 3.4 2.9 4.3 2.8 2.5 2.1
Private Consumption 2.2 5.4 4.2 2.1 3.3 3.6
Government Consumption 1.9 0.8 1.3 -3.6 -1.9 1.9
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 11.9 27.5 15.8 9.0 1.7 -3.2
Exports, Goods and Services 5.7 6.2 4.1 4.3 5.5 6.1
Imports, Goods and Services 4.4 15.0 8.2 4.0 3.5 3.3
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.8 2.9 4.3 2.8 2.5 2.1
Agriculture 2.1 3.9 5.1 2.1 2.1 2.1
Industry 3.3 25.8 -2.2 3.0 3.2 3.5
Services 4.8 -20.6 14.6 2.8 1.7 0.2
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 1.5 -0.3 2.4 3.1 2.1 1.6
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -13.2 -18.1 -18.9 -18.5 -17.9 -17.3
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 9.3 12.4 15.5 15.2 14.8 14.3
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 16.9 9.4 11.4 11.3 10.9 9.3
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -7.3 -3.1 -5.4 -3.1 -0.6 2.2
Debt (% of GDP) 66.2 64.4 66.3 70.5 68.1 63.3
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -4.9 -1.0 -3.0 -0.8 1.8 4.6
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 4.6 4.2 4.4 4.8 4.6 4.4
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2009-HBS and 2014-HBS. Actual data: 2014. Nowcast: 2015 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using point-to-point elasticity (2009-2014) with pass-through = 0.4 based on private consumption per capita in constant LCU, with estimated impact of fiscal
consolidation.
MPO 67 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 81
continued to rise and labor shortages have
Recent developments started to affect business activity.
POLAND After two years of persistent deflation,
consumer prices rose an average of 2 per-
Booming domestic demand boosted real cent in 2017, mainly because of higher
GDP growth to 4.6 percent in 2017, from global commodity prices, food inflation
Table 1 2017 2.9 percent in 2016. Powered by an ex- and firmer domestic demand. At 2.1 per-
Population, million 37.9 tremely strong labor market and social cent year on year in December 2017, infla-
GDP, current US$ billion 504.7 spending (mainly for the Family 500+ pro- tion is still below the National Bank of
GDP per capita, current US$ 13306 gram), private consumption grew by 4.8 Poland (NBP) medium-term target of 2.5
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 0.4 percent, adding 2.8 percentage points to percent. Demand-side price pressures are
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 0.8 GDP growth. modest so far, with core inflation just 0.9
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 2.6 The biggest positive development in 2017 percent year on year in December. Real
was a 5.4 percent expansion in gross fixed monetary conditions eased considerably
Gini coefficienta 31.8
investment. This was a remarkable recov- in 2017, despite nominal appreciation of
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 78.2 ery from a 7.9 percent drop in 2016 caused the zloty. Since March 2015 the NBP Mon-
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. by a cyclical fall in EU-funded projects, etary Policy Council has kept its bench-
Notes: reduced FDI inflow, and elevated political mark policy rate unchanged at 1.5 percent.
(a) Most recent value (2015), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). risk. The rebound in investment resulted The zloty continued to be somewhat vola-
from the resumption of EU funding and tile in 2017 but strengthened overall
removal of a source of instability in the against the euro and the US dollar.
banking sector related to the conversion of It is estimated that poverty and shared
foreign-currency-denominated mortgages prosperity indicators continued to im-
Real GDP growth picked up to 4.6 per- to local currency. prove in 2017 in light of surging private
cent in 2017, driven primarily by private The renewed investment helped to consumption supported by a tight labor
consumption. A recovery in investment boost import demand in the second half market and government social pro-
of the year. Hence, despite heavy de- grams. Poverty is expected to have de-
in the end of 2017 promises continued
mand for Poland’s exports from outside clined from 2.7 percent in 2015 to 1.3
growth. The main risks to medium term
of the euro zone, net exports contribut- percent in 2017 using the $5.50/day 2011
growth relate to labor shortages and lower ed just 0.1 percentage points to overall PPP poverty line.
allocation of EU funds for Poland. Pov- GDP growth. More efficient tax collection helped the gov-
erty will continue to decline in line with Labor market conditions have tightened ernment to realize its ambitious 2017 spend-
further. The ratio of vacancies to unem- ing plans while running the tightest budget
growing disposable incomes. Although
ployment has shot past 10 percent; in execution on record. This was possible be-
the general deficit is at a record low, four years the number of low-skilled un- cause more was collected in taxes, mostly
structural weakening is possible. Fiscal employed has been cut in half and now from indirect taxes (due to robust private
adjustment may constitute a challenge as accounts for just 30 percent of unemploy- consumption and improved tax compli-
ment; and, for the first time since the ance) but also from one-off non-tax reve-
Poland prepares for elections.
transition, long-term unemployment nues, such as higher NBP profits. In 2016
dipped below 500,000. Employment rates the general government deficit narrowed to
FIGURE 1 Poland / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Poland / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real private consumption per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
6.0 5.0 14 35000
4.6
5.0 4.2
4.0 3.6 3.8 3.7 3.5 12 30000
3.3 2.9 10 25000
3.0
2.0 1.6 1.4 8 20000
1.0 6 15000
0.0 4 10000
-1.0
2 5000
-2.0
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 20162017e2018f2019f2020f 0 0
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Final consumption Gross Fixed Investment
Change in inventories Net exports International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
Statistical Discrepancy GDP growth Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: MFMod, World Bank. Sources: World Bank (see notes to Table 2).
MPO 68 Apr 18
82 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
a 1.6 percent of GDP, a record low, after cycle leading up to the elections. High
hitting 2.5 percent in 2016. corporate profitability and EU funds Risks and challenges
Despite the zloty appreciating against the should support private investment. Ex-
euro and heightened domestic demand, ports and industrial production are like-
the strong performance of exports man- ly to benefit from stronger European There are three main clouds on Poland’s
aged in 2017 to lift the current account to a demand in 2018-19, but imports may economic horizon: (i) Structural weaken-
surplus of 0.1 percent of GDP. outpace both. ing in public finance; (ii) a shortage of la-
The general government deficit is set to bor; and (iii) EU sanctions against Poland
widen again in 2018 to about 2 percent of for not respecting EU democratic values.
Outlook GDP—but still safely below the 3 per- First, the government's spending plans,
cent EU threshold. Spending is expected with increases in social benefits and public
to rise due to higher government con- investment, and the reduction in the statu-
In light of the positive investment results sumption, local pre-elections investment, tory retirement age, could erode the struc-
in 2017 and improved growth prospects and the decision to roll back the planned ture of public finances. Strengthening the
in the EU, the previous projection of real increases of the retirement age. The reve- fiscal position might be difficult given lo-
GDP growth for Poland has been revised nue side will also contribute to the in- cal, presidential, and parliamentary elec-
upward by 0.2 percentage points: again, creasing budget gap: non-tax revenues tions all coming up within 18 months. Sec-
driven by both private consumption and could be lower this year due to less NBP ond, the shortage of labor may soon weigh
investment; economic growth may reach profit, and the change in retirement age heavily on GDP growth, and would be
4.2 percent in 2018 and 3.7 percent in will depress social contributions from exacerbated by retirement of a greater part
2019. Household spending will benefit the cohort eligible for earlier retirement. of the workforce. Too few workers could
from growth in the real wage bill of Public debt will stabilize around 51 per- negatively affect production capacities and
more than 8 percent in 2018-19, plus cent of GDP in 2018-19, but the structur- investment. This would heighten pressure
higher state spending on pensions and al budget deficit will widen. on the government to encourage immigra-
social benefits. Rising real incomes are The current-account is likely to come tion, which could come primarily from
expected to lead to further declines in back to a small deficit in 2018 as robust Ukraine. Third, the government's failure to
poverty. The $5.50/ day 2011 PPP pov- household consumption, higher invest- address rule of law issues and a vote by
erty rate is projected to decline to 1.2 ment, and a firming in global commodity the European Parliament in late 2017 to
percent in 2018 and further to 1.0 percent markets push up the volume and cost of initiate Article 7 proceedings against Po-
by 2020. imports. Nonetheless, the current- land may lead the EU to impose sanctions,
Public spending is likely to be strong, account deficit will remain modest in possibly lowering the EU fund allocation
supported by EU funds and the political 2018-20 at less than 0.5 percent of GDP. for 2021–27.
TABLE 2 Poland / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 3.8 2.9 4.6 4.2 3.7 3.5
Private Consumption 3.0 3.9 4.8 4.0 3.7 3.3
Government Consumption 2.4 1.7 3.1 3.7 3.0 3.2
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 6.1 -7.9 5.4 6.7 6.4 6.1
Exports, Goods and Services 7.7 8.8 7.1 6.2 5.2 5.4
Imports, Goods and Services 6.6 7.9 7.3 6.7 5.9 5.9
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.7 2.8 4.2 4.3 3.7 3.5
Agriculture -8.5 2.8 1.8 2.2 2.2 2.2
Industry 3.8 3.6 4.5 4.1 4.1 4.1
Services 4.1 2.6 4.2 4.4 3.7 3.3
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) -1.0 -0.6 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.5
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -0.5 -0.3 0.1 -0.3 -0.3 -0.1
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 2.2 5.4 2.9 2.4 1.9 1.8
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 1.9 1.1 1.0 1.5 1.6 1.5
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -2.6 -2.5 -1.6 -2.1 -2.6 -2.9
Debt (% of GDP) 51.1 54.1 53.1 51.7 51.0 50.7
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -0.9 -0.8 0.2 -0.3 -0.8 -1.1
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 2.6 1.7 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.0
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on EU-SILC harmonization, using 2004-EU-SILC and 2015-EU-SILC. Actual data: 2015. Nowcast: 2016 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using point-to-point elasticity (2004-2015) with pass-through = 1 based on private consumption per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 69 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 83
3.4 percent of GDP at end-2017 reflecting
Recent developments the strong imports growth.
ROMANIA The labor market benefited from the eco-
nomic growth, with unemployment fall-
Private consumption (+8.8 percent) was ing to 4.6 percent as of December 2017 – a
the main driver of growth in 2017, fueled 25-year low – and real wages increasing
Table 1 2017 by tax cuts; hikes in minimum and public- by 8.1 percent. Nonetheless, the low em-
Population, million 19.6 sector wages; and increases in pensions ployment rate of 65.3 in Q3 2017, down 0.2
GDP, current US$ billion 206.9 that boosted disposable incomes. With a percentage points from the previous quar-
GDP per capita, current US$ 10563 5.4 percent increase, investment also ter, reflects persistent structural rigidities
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 25.6 showed signs of recovery. Exports grew in the labor market.
Gini coefficienta 35.9 strongly (+9.5 percent), but were outpaced In line with economic growth, a boost in
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 89.8 by imports (+11.1 percent). On the produc- private consumption and labor market
tion side, ICT (+10.9 percent) and industry improvements, the poverty rate corre-
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 75.0
(+8 percent) were the main drivers of sponding to upper middle-income coun-
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. growth, with agriculture (+18.3 percent) tries (using the $5.50/day 2011 PPP pov-
Notes:
(a) Most recent value (2015), 2011 PPPs. performing better than expected, facilitat- erty line) is estimated to have declined
(b) Most recent WDI value (2014). ed by good weather conditions. from 26.1 percent in 2015 to 23.6 percent
Fiscal policy was pro-cyclical in 2017. In- in 2017, continuing its downward path
creases in public wages and pensions led since the peak of the crisis in 2011 (31.7
to a 22 percent hike in the compensation percent). High poverty incidence contin-
of employees and a 15.5 percent increase ues to be associated with reliance on agri-
Private consumption propelled growth to 7 in current spending, outpacing fiscal reve- culture and in rural/marginalized areas.
nue growth (+12.5 percent). The deficit, Employment gains in sectors that employ
percent in 2017. Growth was supported by
however, remained below 3 percent of a large share of low-skilled people have
an expansionary fiscal policy, that coincid-
GDP because of the decline in public in- helped improve the incomes of the bottom
ed with an increase in exports to a resur- vestment (-9.5 percent), including low 40 and prevented a further increase in the
gent EU. Improvements in the labor mar- utilization of the EU funds. Gini index in 2015.
ket contributed to poverty reduction. The expansionary fiscal policy led to an
overheating of the economy, contributing
Growth will remain solid in 2018, but
also to inflation to 4.7 percent in February Outlook
medium-term risks to the outlook have 2018 – above the upper limit of the Na-
increased. Pressures on the budget deficit, tional Bank of Romania (NBR) band. In
arising from an increase in recurrent response, the NBR board increased the The economy is projected to continue to
policy rate by 25 ppts (to 2.25 percent) in grow above potential in 2018. GDP will
spending, will continue in 2018. To im-
two consecutive meetings in early 2018. likely expand by around 5.1 percent in
prove the quality of growth, renewed atten-
This came amid robust private sector cred- 2018, driven by the fiscal stimulus and
tion should be given to public investment. it growth (up 5.6 percent as of December aided by a resurgent EU. Continued
2017) and concerns over the fiscal stance. growth in consumption is expected to
The current account deficit deteriorated to widen the current account deficit to 4.3
FIGURE 1 Romania / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Romania / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real GDP per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) GDP per capita (constant LCU)
12 45 10000
10 40 9000
8 35 8000
6 7000
30
4 6000
25
2 5000
20
0 4000
-2 15 3000
-4 10 2000
-6 5 1000
2014 2015 2016 2017e 2018f 2019f 2020f
0 0
Net exports Private Consumption 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Gross fixed capital formation Public Consumption
GDP Upper middle-income pov. rate GDP pc
Sources: World Bank, Romanian National Statistical Institute. Sources: World Bank. Notes: see Table 2.
MPO 70 Apr 18
84 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
percent in 2018. Inflation is set to peak at growth in real wages, partly supported by likely tapering of the quantitative easing
around 5 percent in mid-2018 reflecting minimum wage increases, should boost in the Eurozone and higher global interest
the excess domestic demand and the fad- real incomes and lead to further declines rates may lead to a repositioning in inves-
ing out of the base effect of the tax cuts. in poverty incidence. Moreover, the tor sentiment towards the emerging econ-
The NBR anticipates a gradual subsequent planned introduction of the Minimum omies and to higher refinancing costs,
decline in inflation towards 3.5 percent at Social Inclusion Income program (MSII) is further reinforcing fiscal pressures. On the
the end of 2018, due to a slowdown in expected to improve targeting and in- upside, a better-than-projected economic
private consumption dynamics as no fur- crease the level of benefits for the most performance of the Eurozone will act as a
ther fiscal boost to households’ real dis- vulnerable. The $5.50/day 2011 PPP pov- driver of growth in the broader EU area,
posable income is envisioned. erty rate is projected to decline to 22.6 including Romania.
The fiscal measures passed in 2017 have percent in 2018, 21.7 percent in 2019, and Renewed efforts are needed to improve
put pressure on the consolidated budget 20.9 percent in 2020. labor participation and generate broad-
deficit. In the absence of corrective based employment, as unemployment
measures, the fiscal deficit is projected to remains high among youth and the low-
reach 3.3 percent of GDP in 2018, which Risks and challenges skilled, and to ensure that all Romanians
would place Romania on a trajectory to re- obtain access to high quality public ser-
entering the Excessive Deficit Procedure vices. Gradually, the focus of the fiscal
of the EU. However, the government has Accumulating fiscal pressures and excess policy should be rebalanced away from
stated that, like in 2017, it would be ready domestic demand limit the space for poli- boosting consumption towards mobiliz-
to promote adjustment measures should cy-makers to maneuver in 2018 and be- ing investment, including from the EU
the deficit threaten the 3 percent ceiling. yond. The current account deficit is on the funds, to support a sustainable EU con-
The widening of the fiscal deficit would rise, and inflationary pressures persist. vergence path and social inclusion. Re-
push public debt to 46.8 percent of GDP at These developments leave the Romanian forms in public administration and
end-2020, from 44.5 percent in 2017. De- economy vulnerable to exogenous shocks. SOEs, increased regulatory predictabil-
spite this, public debt remains one of the The authorities may need to take correc- ity, as well as policies to address the
lowest in the EU. tive measures to keep the deficit below 3 large social and spatial discrepancies
Strong private consumption aided by the percent of GDP in 2018 through good should be on the agenda of priorities of
expansionary fiscal policy and continued quality fiscal adjustment. Externally, a the government.
TABLE 2 Romania / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 3.9 4.8 7.0 5.1 4.5 4.1
Private Consumption 5.7 7.1 8.8 8.1 7.2 6.6
Government Consumption -0.8 4.8 6.2 5.9 5.4 5.1
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 7.2 0.8 5.4 6.2 5.1 4.8
Exports, Goods and Services 5.3 7.6 9.5 8.3 7.1 7.0
Imports, Goods and Services 9.4 9.7 11.1 9.7 8.4 8.1
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 3.6 4.6 7.0 5.1 4.5 4.1
Agriculture -11.1 -0.8 18.3 3.0 2.1 2.0
Industry 6.1 0.4 8.0 6.1 5.2 4.6
Services 4.3 8.1 5.0 4.8 4.4 4.1
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) -0.6 -1.5 1.3 3.7 3.2 3.0
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -1.2 -2.6 -3.4 -4.3 -4.7 -4.9
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 1.4 2.7 3.5 4.4 4.8 5.0
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 1.8 1.8 2.5 3.1 3.0 3.0
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -1.5 -2.7 -2.9 -3.3 -3.0 -3.0
Debt (% of GDP) 39.4 44.5 44.5 45.6 46.3 46.8
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -0.1 -1.3 -1.5 -1.9 -1.5 -1.4
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b,c 26.1 25.0 23.6 22.6 21.7 20.9
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on EU-SILC harmonization, using 2007-EU-SILC, 2012-EU-SILC, and 2015-EU-SILC.
(b) Projection using annualized elasticity (2007-2012) with pass-through = 0.7 based on GDP per capita in constant LCU.
(c) Actual data: 2015. Nowcast: 2016 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
MPO 71 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 85
another systemically important private
Recent developments bank (Promsvyazbank, 1.6 percent share
RUSSIAN by assets) was bailed out by CBR. That
made it the third bank to be rescued un-
FEDERATION In 2017, Russia’s economy emerged from der a new resolution mechanism. As a
recession to recovery, with the GDP ex- result, the share of state-controlled banks
panding by 1.5 percent year-on-year. in the combined assets of the Russian
Deepening macro-economic stability, banking system has increased to 66.2 per-
firming energy prices and a recovering cent, most of them under CBR ownership
Table 1 2017
global economy contributed to the return (45 percent of assets). This may affect the
GDP, current US$ billion 1578.6
to growth. Non-tradable sectors, primari- level playing-field and pose a conflict of
GDP per capita, current US$ 10771
ly transportation, retail and wholesale interest between the CBR’s regulatory and
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 0.0 trade, contributed 1.4 percentage points ownership functions.
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 0.3 (pp) of the 1.5 percent total. Mineral- In 2017, credit grew both in retail and cor-
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 2.7 resource extraction increased by 1.4 per- porate segments (13.3 percent and 3.8 per-
Gini coefficienta 37.7 cent, year-on-year, as oil production cent, year-on-year, respectively). The
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 100.5 flattened after Russia joined the OPEC+ share of non-performing loans remained
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 70.9 agreement. Growth in manufacturing was stable—but high—at 10 percent as of Janu-
subdued, partly due to lower public ary 1, 2018, and the overall banking sector
WDI, MPO, Rosstat, and Bank of Russia.
Notes: spending on defense. capital adequacy ratio was also stable at
(a) Most recent value (2015), 2011 PPPs. Domestic demand was the main engine of 12.1 percent. However, compared to other
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015).
growth. Both household and investment emerging markets, both figures point to
demand expanded. Private consumption, underlying vulnerabilities in Russia. As of
supported by growing real wages and January 1, 2018, profitability in the bank-
Russia’s economy has emerged from reces- pensions and by a revival of credit to ing sector declined to 2016 levels, with the
sion to recovery, supported by deepening households, contributed 1.8 pp to growth. return on assets and equity at 1 percent
Fixed-capital investment in mineral re- and 8.3 percent, respectively.
macro-economic stability, firming energy
source extraction, transportation, and in The CBR continued its gradual approach
prices and global recovery. Growth is pro- the financial sector, mainly supported to monetary easing aimed at anchoring
jected to settle between 1.7 and 1.8 percent investment growth. However, growth in inflation expectations. A combination of a
in 2018 — 2020. However, many house- manufacturing was not followed by fixed stronger ruble and a bumper harvest, and
capital investment growth. While robust relatively tight monetary and fiscal policy,
holds remain close to the poverty line, and
external demand supported the country’s helped reach record-low inflation levels.
many individuals lack formal jobs. Priori-
exports, a major increase in imports result- In 2017, consumer inflation reached 3.7
ty policy objectives include limiting the ed in a negative contribution of net ex- percent (year-on-year, 12-month average),
role of the state in the economy, increasing ports to GDP growth. down from 7.1 percent in 2016.
investment, and promoting fair competi- The Central Bank of Russia (CBR) contin- In 2017, the current account surplus
ued to clean up the banking sector: 16 reached US$40.2 billion, strengthened by
tion, as well as measures to improve in-
banks had their licenses revoked due to an improved trade balance, and was mir-
vestments in human capital. non-compliance with regulations, and rored by higher net capital outflows,
FIGURE 1 Russian Federation/ Real GDP growth and FIGURE 2 Russian Federation / Actual and projected
contributions to real GDP growth poverty rates and real private consumption per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
8 30 300000
6
25 250000
4
2
20 200000
0
-2 15 150000
-4
-6 10 100000
-8
5 50000
-10
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
0 0
Consumption Gross fixed capital formation 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019
Change in inventories Export
Import Stat error International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
GDP growth Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: Russia Statistical Authorities and World Bank staff Calculations. Sources: World Bank (see notes to Table 2).
MPO 72 Apr 18
86 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
mainly from the banking sector, which The poverty rate under the national defini- driver of income growth for the bottom 40
continued its external-debt repayments. tion (population share with income per percent. Wage growth and pension indexa-
International reserves increased by capita below subsistence minimum level of tion at the inflation level, will support dis-
US$15.4 billion mainly on the back of cur- 9,828 rubles per month in 2016) increased posable incomes and contribute to a gradual
rency purchases conducted by the CBR on marginally from 13.3 percent in 2015 to decline in the poverty rate. However, many
behalf of Ministry of Finance. 13.4 percent in 2016. The international households remain close to the poverty line,
The general government fiscal stance im- moderate poverty rate (population share and many individuals lack formal jobs.
proved in 2017, aided by higher oil prices, with per capita consumption below 5.5
a recovering economy, an improved tax USD/day in 2011 PPP) increased from 2.7
administration, and lower expenditures. percent in 2015 to an estimated 3.3 percent Risks and challenges
The general government primary budget in 2016, before decreasing to an estimated
deficit narrowed from 2.8 percent of GDP 2.9 percent in 2017, as wages and pensions
in 2016 to 0.6 percent of GDP in 2017. Rus- increased. The extreme poverty rate re- External downside risks stem from a sig-
sia’s new fiscal rule, expected to reduce mained marginal, below one percent. nificant drop in oil prices, a sudden tight-
the influence of external volatility on the ening of global financial conditions and an
budget and the real exchange rate, comes expansion of sanctions.
into effect in 2019 and will require fiscal Outlook The performance of the banking sector is
consolidation in 2018-20. Combined with expected to remain stable. However, the
the move towards inflation-targeting, it bailout of three large private banks points
underscores the Russian authorities’ com- Amid the recovered oil prices, macro sta- to the continuing fragility in the sector, and
mitment to enhance macro-stability. bilization and improved business and the quality of capital and assets, and related
Unemployment declined further in 2017 consumer confidence, we expect Russia’s -party lending will likely remain a concern.
to a current 5.2 percent, while real wages economy to keep growing. With the ex- Weak productivity growth and a shrinking
and pensions increased on the back of pected price of oil remaining robust at labor force will constrain GDP growth.
low inflation. Wage growth was highest US$58, 59 and 60/bbl in 2018, 2019, and Priority policy objectives include limiting
in the tradable sector and above the rate 2020 respectively, our growth estimates the role of the state in the economy, in-
of inflation in the non-tradable and pub- stand at 1.7 percent in 2018, 1.8 percent in creasing investment, and promoting fair
lic sectors. However, growth in real dis- 2019 and 1.8 percent in 2020. competition. Also, measures to improve
posable incomes remained negative, The moderate poverty rate is expected to the quality of and access to health and
driven by a decline in income from other fall in 2018 and further through 2019. As education services will be needed to pro-
sources, including some not directly reg- public spending is constrained, labor in- mote longer and more productive work-
istered by statistics. come will become the most important ing lives.
TABLE 2 Russian Federation / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices -2.5 -0.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.8
Private Consumption -9.4 -2.8 3.4 3.1 2.5 2.5
Government Consumption -3.1 0.9 -0.9 -0.6 -0.5 0.0
Gross Fixed Capital Investment -11.2 0.8 3.6 2.7 2.7 2.7
Exports, Goods and Services 3.7 3.2 5.4 2.0 3.0 3.0
Imports, Goods and Services -25.1 -3.6 17.0 7.0 4.0 4.0
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices -1.9 0.0 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Agriculture 2.5 2.9 1.2 1.7 1.7 1.7
Industry -2.4 0.4 0.6 1.1 1.6 1.6
Services -2.0 -0.5 2.2 2.0 1.9 1.9
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 15.5 7.1 3.7 3.2 4.0 4.0
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 5.0 2.0 2.5 2.9 2.8 2.7
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) -5.2 -1.6 -2.8 -2.9 -2.8 -2.7
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) -1.1 0.8 -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.5
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)a -3.4 -3.5 -1.6 -0.3 0.7 0.7
Debt (% of GDP) 15.9 15.7 15.1 15.6 16.1 16.3
Primary Balance (% of GDP)a -2.6 -2.6 -0.7 0.6 1.6 1.6
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)b,c 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)b,c 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)b,c 2.7 3.3 2.9 2.6 2.4 2.1
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Fiscal and Primary Balance refer to general government balances.
(b) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2015-HBS. Actual data: 2015. Nowcast: 2016 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(c) Projection using neutral distribution (2015) with pass-through = 1 based on private consumption per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 73 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 87
salaries increased by 3.9 percent in nomi-
Recent developments nal terms in 2017 compared to the year
SERBIA before, mainly driven by growth of wages
in the private sector (increase of 4.5 per-
External, one-off factors, such as the dis- cent). The average pension was 2.4 per-
ruption of energy production in early cent higher than in 2016.
Table 1 2017 2017 and a drought which affected agri- Since employment and labor income play
Population, million 7.0 culture, coupled with the slow imple- a strong role in influencing welfare of the
GDP, current US$ billion 41.2 mentation of the government’s invest- poor and vulnerable, poverty (living on
GDP per capita, current US$ 5860 ment program, led to slower than previ- income under $5.5/day in 2011PPP terms,
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 5.6 ously-projected growth in 2017. Based on the standardized middle-income-country
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 11.1 preliminary assessments from the nation- poverty line) is estimated to have declined
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 23.6 al authorities, the economy grew by 1.9 from 23.8 percent in 2014, to 23.1 percent
percent y/y, compared to previously pro- in 2016, to 22.4 percent in 2017. The in-
Gini coefficienta 39.7 jected 2.3 percent. Widening external crease of salaries and public sector pen-
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 101.3 deficit, increase in imports and recovery sions helped household budgets to recov-
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 75.5 in consumption are driving a shift from er some of the losses from previous fiscal
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. positive to negative contribution of net- consolidation measures. The energy bill
Notes: exports to growth. discount program for vulnerable popula-
(a) Most recent value (2015), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). Looking at sectors of the economy, both tions was expanded in 2017 to mitigate the
services and industry performed well in impact of increases in electricity tariffs, as
2017, growing by 2.2 and 3.9 percent (in part of fiscal reforms. However, a decline
real terms), respectively. Construction in agriculture output in 2017 is likely to
Despite a slowdown in economic growth sector started to recover as well (growing have adverse impacts on rural poverty
(GDP growth, now estimated at 1.9 per- at 1.8 percent y/y) on the back of recent and slow the pace of poverty reduction
cent y/y in 2017), labor market perfor- improvements in issuing construction overall. Also, food prices increased (up by
permits and lower financing costs as inter- 4.1 percent through December) more than
mance improved and unemployment
est rates fell in 2017. On the other hand, the average CPI, in particular over the
reached 13.5 percent. The state of public agriculture sector output is estimated to summer months, and likely affecting the
finances improved significantly and Ser- have fallen by 9.5 percent (in real terms), poor disproportionately. Overall inflation
bia showed a budget surplus in 2017. compared to 2016, due to the drought. reached 3 percent by year-end.
Growth in industry and services contribut- A good budget performance continued
Poverty is estimated to have declined
ed to steady labor market performance in throughout 2017 and Serbia ended up
from 23.8 percent in 2014 to 23.1 per-
2017, which improved over 2016. The activ- with a surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP in
cent in 2016. Over the medium-term, ity rate increased to 54 percent in 2017 2017. As a result of lower financing needs,
growth is expected to reach 3-4 percent, (annual average) while the employment public debt declined to around 62.5 per-
although risks remain, especially from rate stood at 46.7 percent (compare to 45.2 cent of GDP year end, compared to 74
percent in 2016), even with unemployment percent at the end of 2016. Part of the rea-
policy reversals related to previous fiscal
edging up only slightly in the fourth quar- son for improved budget performance lies
stability program. ter of 2017, to reach 14.7 percent. Average in under-execution of the capital budget
FIGURE 1 Serbia / General government balance (% of GDP) FIGURE 2 Serbia / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real private consumption per capita
Percent of GDP Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
2.00 30 400000
1.00
25
0.00 380000
-1.00 20
360000
-2.00
15
-3.00
340000
-4.00 10
-5.00 320000
5
-6.00
-7.00 0 300000
2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
-8.00
International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: WB Staff calculations based on the Ministry of Finance and the Statisti- Sources: World Bank. Notes see Table 2.
cal office data.
MPO 74 Apr 18
88 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
(down -9.5 percent in 2017, in nominal
terms), which however had a negative Outlook Risks and challenges
impact on growth.
The current account deficit (CAD) al-
most doubled (in euro terms) in 2017 (an In 2018 as well as over the medium term, As witnessed over the last couple of years,
increase of 94 percent, y/y). This resulted growth is expected to pick up, thus helping Serbian economy is highly vulnerable to
in widening trade deficit, as import in- with labor market recovery and poverty climate change related events (droughts,
creased significantly (14.2 percent, y/y, reduction. Growth is expected to be driven severe winters, floods, etc.). These external
or around EUR 2 billion), because of a by increased investment, stimulated by shocks might reoccur at any moment in
higher import of energy and consumer reforms to improve the business climate, the future thus endangering growth pro-
goods. The growing external deficit con- and the recovery of consumption (as the jections. Also, such events often hurt more
tinued to be financed by FDI, which in- fiscal consolidation program gradually the poor who predominantly live in areas
creased by 37.5 percent in euro terms. expires and private sector wages continue less protected from climate-related weath-
FDI covers 135 percent of CAD. Foreign to grow). Growth is expected to be around er events and who depend more on in-
currency reserves dropped by 243 mil- 3-4 percent over the medium term. come earned in agriculture. In addition,
lion euros in 2017. With economic growth and improvements faster growth requires further effort to-
The dinar strengthened by 4 percent in the labor market, poverty is expected to ward implementation of structural re-
against the euro in 2017, while foreign continue its gradual decline. Poverty, meas- forms: in secondary and tertiary educa-
currency reserves decreased by about ured as income below the standardized $5.5/ tion; health financing; privatization of
EUR 245 million through December. The day 2011PPP line is estimated to continue remaining state stakes in SOEs and finan-
banking sector remains stable and loans to declining to around 21 percent by 2019. As cial institutions. Also, special attention
the private sector increased by 3.6 percent part of the government’s fiscal consolidation needs to be paid to expanding external
by end-December (y/y), but mainly due to program, another nominal electricity tariff imbalances. Any delay with implantation
increase in lending to households (up 7.8 increase in 2018 will be considered, though of these reforms can have a major impact
percent, y/y). NPLs declined to 11.1 per- smaller than previous increases. The recent- on growth outlook. In addition, the poten-
cent through November, due to more ac- ly expanded energy bill discount program tial distributional impacts of these im-
tive role of banks in selling and writing off can help protect vulnerable customers, but portant structural reforms may present
NPLs. Still, NPLs represent a significant implementation challenges related to pro- continued challenges to faster poverty
problem for state-owned banks. cessing of applications remain. reduction in the short run.
TABLE 2 Serbia / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 0.8 2.8 1.9 3.0 3.5 4.0
Private Consumption 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.2 2.9 4.0
Government Consumption -1.5 2.3 4.0 3.6 -0.4 11.8
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 5.6 5.1 3.7 5.6 7.7 2.9
Exports, Goods and Services 10.2 12.0 8.1 6.5 7.5 7.5
Imports, Goods and Services 9.3 9.0 7.0 5.9 6.4 7.3
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 0.7 3.2 1.4 3.0 3.5 4.0
Agriculture -7.7 8.1 -9.9 5.0 3.0 3.0
Industry 3.0 2.4 4.5 4.0 5.0 5.0
Services 1.1 2.8 1.7 2.3 2.9 3.7
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 1.4 1.1 3.0 3.3 3.5 3.5
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -4.7 -3.1 -5.7 -4.7 -4.4 -4.6
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 3.9 1.5 4.6 3.1 2.8 2.7
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 3.7 3.7 4.7 4.3 4.3 4.1
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -3.6 -1.3 1.2 -0.6 -0.7 -1.2
Debt (% of GDP) 76.0 73.2 62.4 60.0 57.5 55.5
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -0.4 2.2 3.9 2.2 2.2 1.3
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 5.6 5.5 5.4 5.3 5.3 5.1
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 11.1 10.8 10.6 10.4 10.0 9.6
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 23.6 23.1 22.4 21.7 20.9 19.7
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on EU-SILC harmonization, using 2015-EU-SILC. Actual data: 2015. Nowcast: 2016 - 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2015) with pass-through = 0.87 based on private consumption per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 75 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 89
percent of GDP in investment, while keep-
Recent development ing current spending below 18 percent of
TAJIKISTAN GDP. The fiscal contraction was attained
through cuts of non-priority outlays, de-
Real GDP growth accelerated to 7.1 percent lays in implementation of further banking
in 2017 from 6.9 percent a year ago. The sector bailouts and contained the overall
Table 1 2017 economy was largely fueled by private fiscal stance. Construction of the Rogun
Population, million 8.8 consumption, supported by remittances— HPP was on full track, facilitated by pro-
GDP, current US$ billion 7.2 which expanded by about 16 percent ceeds from the Eurobond issuance in late
GDP per capita, current US$ 812 through nine months of 2017, y-o-y—and 2017. The latter increased the level of pub-
Poverty rate (LCU 187.7/month)a 29.7 by net exports, boosted by metallic miner- lic debt to above 50 percent of GDP, exac-
Gini coefficienta 28.0 als. Investments have also fostered growth, erbating the country’s debt-related risks.
School enrollment, primary (% gross)b 98.2 despite a deceleration in gross fixed capital The external position continued to im-
formation, reflected both more muted FDI prove on the back of the recovering remit-
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 71.0
as well as a base effect from past increases. tances, net export growth and more gener-
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. On the supply side, growth was supported ally improved terms of trade. During the
Notes:
(a) 2017. by both tradable and non-tradable sectors first three quarters of 2017, the current
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). with the highest contribution by industry account balance turned positive to 1.5 per-
followed by agriculture and services. cent of GDP compared to a 4 percent defi-
Annual consumer price inflation accelerat- cit in the same period of 2016. Exports
ed to 6.7 percent, slightly above last year’s grew by over 23 percent bolstered by high-
6 percent, yet within the National Bank’s er production of metallic minerals, while
Tajikistan’s economy sustained high
target of 7±2 percent. Inflationary pressures imports declined by 3 percent in the first
growth in 2017 supported by an improved stemmed from the depreciation of the na- nine months of 2017, y-o-y. Foreign direct
external environment, reflected in net tional currency (about 11 percent during investments contracted to 2.1 percent of
exports and the recovering remittances. the year) which pushed up prices of im- GDP through January-September 2017 (a
ported goods along with factors, such as a historical low), compared to 2.9 percent of
The positive outlook for the Russian econ-
supply-side shock on some food staples GDP in the corresponding period of 2016.
omy, the improving regional environ- and increases in utility tariffs. As inflation- The financial sector remains partially in-
ment, and construction of Rogun hydro- ary pressures and expectations moderated, solvent despite some reduction of non-
power plant (HPP) support strong the National Bank lowered the policy rate performing loans from 47 percent in 2016
to 14.75 percent in the beginning of 2018. to 35.8 percent by end 2017. The two larg-
growth projections. However, the slow
Preliminary fiscal outcomes for 2017 sug- est problem banks have downsized sig-
pace of reforms, heightened vulnerabili-
gest that the government adhered to the nificantly and now account for about 20
ties, and the pending decisions in the approved medium-term Fiscal Strategy percent of the banking sector. While
banking and SOE sectors present down- 2017-20. The overall fiscal deficit was re- boosting efforts for asset sales, rehabilita-
side risks. Poverty reduction prospects duced to 2.6 percent of GDP in 2017 from tion plans have been submitted to the gov-
3.9 percent in the previous year (excluding ernment’s review. The needed, long-
remain positive as remittances continue to
6.1 percent of GDP related to the financial pending legislative amendments, which
recover and growth is sustained. sector bailout). The authorities spent 13.6 aimed at enhancing the financial sector
FIGURE 1 Tajikistan / Real GDP growth and contributions FIGURE 2 Tajikistan / Official poverty rate and real GDP
to real GDP growth growth, actual and projected, 2014-20
Percent, percentagepoints Percent Percent
8 34% 8%
6.7 6.9 7.1
6.0 6.1 6.0 6.0 32% 7%
6
6%
30%
5%
4
28% 4%
3%
2 26%
Official poverty rate (LHS) 2%
24% Poverty projection (LHS)
1%
0 Real GDP growth (RHS)
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
22% 0%
Agriculture Industry Services Real GDP growth 2014 2015 2016 2017e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Sources: TajStat, World Bank staff estimates. Source: World Bank staff estimates.
MPO 76 Apr 18
90 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
regulation and oversight, are still under by the improved external environment, line as the construction of the Rogun HPP
review by the government. including prices projected for major ex- unwind into imports.
Despite strong growth, poverty fell only port commodities, and deepening rela- Poverty is projected to fall to about 24
slightly from 30.3 percent in 2016 to 29.7 tionship with neighbors, particularly Uz- percent by 2020. Strong growth and recov-
percent by September 2017 with extreme bekistan. Despite the weak banking sec- ering remittances and expansion of the
poverty stagnant at 14.1 percent of popu- tor, growth is expected to be around 6 Targeted Social Assistance (TSA) program
lation. Income from employment and re- percent supported by growing remittanc- nationally are expected to push down
mittances remain the primary drivers of es, construction of large infrastructure poverty over the medium term.
poverty reduction. Lower remittances projects and electricity sales. Inflation is
slowed the pace of poverty reduction in forecasted to remain in single digits as-
2014 – H1 2016, but began recovering in suming the central bank’s move to the Risks and challenges
H2 of 2016, and rebounded throughout inflation targeting framework improves
2017. Poverty was relatively stagnant in inflation monitoring.
urban areas during 2015-16 (hovering at Over the medium term the fiscal stance is Risks are tilted to the downside subject to
around 24 percent) but became more dy- expected to remain prudent, in line with external and domestic factors. External
namic in 2017 by declining to 22 percent. the deficit ceiling set by the Government’s uncertainties may negatively affect re-
During the same period rural poverty fell medium-term fiscal strategy. The fiscal mittance inflows. Domestic vulnerabilities
from 36.1 percent in 2014 to 33.1 percent deficit is projected at around 3 percent of include the adequate resolution of prob-
in 2017. Food expenditure accounts for GDP, primarily reflecting investments into lem banks, growing contingent liabilities
about 75 percent of total consumption for infrastructure projects and higher debt in public enterprises, and a very slow pace
poor households. The Listening-to- service obligations. The baseline scenario of structural reforms, particularly to en-
Tajikistan survey identified a noticeable does not assume additional budget sup- hance the business climate. The country’s
decline in the share of households that port for the banking sector resolution; any deteriorated debt trend and growing debt
have reduced food consumption to pay needed bailout would expand the aug- service obligations pose macro-fiscal chal-
for other basic needs – from about 45 per- mented deficit concomitantly. lenges and limit the fiscal space for much
cent to about 27 percent between Novem- The external balance is expected to deteri- needed social spending. Any potential
ber 2016 to November 2017. orate, while remaining below 3 percent of banking sector bailout and/or second-
GDP affected by second-round effects of round of Eurobonds issuance will sub-
the remittance-driven consumption recov- stantially threaten the country’s fragile
Outlook ery and investment-related imports, par- macroeconomic stability.
ticularly for the construction of the Rogun
HPP. International reserves, which rose to
Tajikistan’s outlook for the short- to medi- 5.6 months of imports by the end of Sep-
um term remains positive and is explained tember 2017, are expected to decline in
TABLE 2 Tajikistan / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 6.0 6.9 7.1 6.1 6.0 6.0
Private Consumption -15.0 6.4 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.5
Government Consumption 3.3 3.9 -5.9 6.8 7.7 8.5
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 24.4 20.3 2.4 3.6 3.8 3.9
Exports, Goods and Services 0.0 0.0 10.4 8.5 8.2 8.1
Imports, Goods and Services 0.0 0.0 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.5
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 5.4 6.6 7.1 6.1 6.0 6.0
Agriculture 3.2 5.2 6.8 5.1 5.2 5.3
Industry 15.7 18.1 14.0 11.0 11.1 11.2
Services 1.6 1.0 2.8 3.3 2.5 2.1
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 5.8 5.9 7.3 8.5 7.0 7.0
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -6.0 -3.8 -1.0 -2.4 -2.5 -2.6
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 7.4 8.1 4.5 2.4 2.5 2.6
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 5.3 4.9 3.1 3.3 3.3 3.3
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -1.9 -9.7 -2.6 -3.0 -3.1 -3.3
Debt (% of GDP) 35.0 43.2 50.4 51.2 51.7 52.2
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -1.3 -9.2 -1.1 -1.2 -1.2 -1.3
National poverty rate a,b 31.3 30.3 29.7 27.7 25.5 23.9
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on 2017 HBS. Actual data: 2015, 2016, 2017. Forecast is from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2017) with pass-through = (0.7) based on GDP per capita constant PPP.
MPO 77 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 91
PPP) fell from 23.1 percent to a low of 9.9
Recent developments percent in the 10 years up to 2016. It is esti-
TURKEY mated to have declined to 9.1 percent in
2017. The more recent progress was helped
Turkey experienced a strong recovery in by the availability of more jobs, coupled
2017 with growth at 7.4 percent growth, with a 30 percent increase in minimum
Table 1 2017 stimulated by fiscal measures and a Credit wage in 2016.
Population, milliona 80.3 Guarantee Fund for SME financing. Con- Strong growth stimulated the labor market
GDP, current US$ billion 850.7 sumption accounted for over two thirds of in 2017. Unemployment rate decreased by
GDP per capita, current US$ 10592 growth in this period, and investment start- 2.3 percentage points from 12.7 percent in
International poverty rate ($1.9)b 0.2 ing to pick up. EU recovery helped acceler- December 2016 to 10.4 percent in December
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)b 9.9 ate exports. 2017. Employment increased by 1.6 million
Gini coefficientb 41.9 Strong demand has come at a cost of grow- persons in the same period, mainly driven
ing macroeconomic imbalances. Consumer by services (55 percent), industry (19.5 per-
School enrollment, primary (% gross)c 102.5
price inflation averaged 11 percent in 2017. cent) and agriculture (18.3 percent). Labor
Life expectancy at birth, yearsc 75.4 The current account deficit widened from force participation rate for females rose to
Source: Turkstat and World Bank staff calculation. 3.8 percent of GDP in 2016 to 5.5 percent in 33.5 percent, a 1.3 percentage point annual
Notes: 2017 amid rising energy prices, high gold inter-annual increase. Meanwhile, the job-
(a) Mid-year official data.
(b) Most recent value (2016), 2011 PPPs. demand and imports stimulated by strong less rate among the youth fell by 4.8 per-
(c) Most recent WDI value (2015). growth. A recovery in net portfolio flows centage points to 19.2 percent.
helped finance half of the current account
deficit while FDI inflows declined. Growth
and import demand accelerated revenue Outlook
Turkey’s strong recovery in 2017 (at 7.4 collection, keeping the fiscal deficit at 1.9
percent) came at a cost of widening mac- percent of GDP in 2017.
The Central Bank raised the effective poli- For 2018, economic growth is projected at
roeconomic imbalances. Growth in 2018,
cy rate from 8.3 to 12.75 percent in 2017 4.7 percent, gradually converging to a
however, is projected to moderate closer to due to price and exchange rate pressures. potential rate of around 4.5-5 percent.
potential, at 4.7 percent. Poverty is fore- Despite this, inflationary expectations Recent surveys point to a moderation in
cast to decrease, although at a slower pace remain high. Growth in money stock (M3) consumer demand, weighed down by
moderated slightly but remained high at rising costs and declining real wages. Rap-
than previous years. Expansionary poli-
16 percent in 2017 in line with strong de- id credit expansion has increased credit
cies will likely in place to stimulate de-
mand, driven by a 20 percent expansion in risk and raised lending rates, pointing to a
mand, especially ahead of the upcoming private sector credit. The Central Bank slowdown in credit growth in 2018.
elections. Key risks include inflation and also introduced stricter regulations on Nevertheless, expansionary policies will
tightening of global financial condi- forex debt for corporates to mitigate risks likely in place to stimulate demand to
of high forex exposure. maintain growth especially ahead of the
tions—all of which could constrain access
Poverty in Turkey continued to decline. elections. The 2018 Budget approved in
to external finance, raise cost of external The population with per capita expenditure December 2018 was supplemented by
debt, and weaken the external balance. below the poverty line ($5.5 a day in 2011 fiscal stimulus measures proposed in
FIGURE 1 Turkey / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Turkey / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real GDP per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) GDP per capita (constant LCU)
20 40 25000
15 35
20000
10 30
5 25 15000
20
0
15 10000
-5
10
-10 5000
5
-15
2000 2003 2006 2009 2012 2015 2018 0 0
2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Gov. cons. Exports GFCF
Inventories Private cons. Imports International poverty rate Upper middle-income pov. rate
Statistical disc. GDP GDP pc
Sources: Turkstat and World Bank staff calculations. Sources: World Bank. Notes: see Table 2.
MPO 78 Apr 18
92 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
February 2018 to accelerate investment to create new jobs and investments in less The US announcement on steel and alumi-
and employment. The latter could poten- developed provinces and reduce high and num tariffs will affect Turkey – the sixth
tially raise the budget deficit target fur- persistent regional inequality. largest seller of steel to the US. The direct
ther. In addition, despite banking sector impact on the trade balance will likely be
pressures, the Credit Guarantee Fund has limited, given the overall level of trade
been extended by a further TL 55 billion Risks and challenges with the US.
for 2018. The current macroeconomic environment
Given the above, inflation is expected to and projected external conditions will re-
remain at just above 10 percent in 2018. External vulnerability for Turkey remains quire monetary and fiscal discipline. Sound
Core inflation, which remained elevated, high. The US monetary policy tightening macroeconomic policies need to be accom-
hit double digits in the last months, and in 2018 could increase the pace and vol- panied by deeper structural reforms to en-
could push headline inflation further. The ume of capital outflows. This increases sure a more sustainable economic growth
current account deficit is projected to re- interest and exchange rate risks for Tur- trajectory over the medium term. Steady
main high at 5.6 percent of GDP. Despite key’s external debt. The private sector is progress in advancing structural reforms
continued export growth driven by con- particularly affected as it accounts for 70 will be key to restoring investor confidence,
tinued recovery in the EU, the import bill percent of external debt. Although most of mitigating vulnerabilities, enhancing
is likely to remain large, not least due to the debt is of long-term maturity, a weak- productivity and supporting growth.
rising commodity prices. er Lira and costlier external financing On the poverty and inequality front, the
Poverty is forecast to decrease at a slower might adversely impact corporates’ bal- impact of the employment subsidies tar-
pace. It is estimated to decline further to ance sheets. geted to disadvantaged populations, and
8.8 percent in 2018 (from 9.1 percent in This raises macro-financial risks. Capital the investment incentives focused on lag-
2017). Poverty could decline more rapidly adequacy and NPL ratios hover around 16 ging regions, remains uncertain, both in
if the recently introduced Attraction Cen- percent and 3 percent respectively, alt- the short term and in the long run. In addi-
ters Program (ACP) proves effective in hough total troubled assets are estimated tion, uptake from private employers may
boosting employment in the poorest re- to be higher. Exchange rate and interest not reach significant levels, and low-
gions. The program covers 23 provinces in rate risks, together with a slowing econo- income candidates may lack skills for jobs
eastern and southeastern Anatolian re- my, all coming on the heels of rapid credit that become available. Considering these
gions where poverty rates are 3-4 times expansion, point to a potential deteriora- constraints, the impact of these policies
higher than in the western regions. It aims tion in banking sector asset quality. warrants close monitoring.
TABLE 2 Turkey / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 6.1 3.2 7.4 4.7 4.4 4.0
Private Consumption 5.4 3.7 6.1 4.0 3.8 3.6
Government Consumption 3.9 9.5 5.0 5.0 5.3 4.6
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 9.3 2.2 7.3 5.3 4.7 4.0
Exports, Goods and Services 4.3 -1.9 12.0 6.7 5.5 5.0
Imports, Goods and Services 1.7 3.7 10.3 6.0 5.2 4.6
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 5.7 3.1 7.8 4.7 4.4 4.0
Agriculture 9.4 -2.6 4.7 1.9 1.9 1.9
Industry 5.0 4.6 9.1 4.0 3.8 3.6
Services 5.6 3.2 7.5 5.4 5.0 4.4
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 7.7 7.8 11.1 10.4 9.0 8.2
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -3.7 -3.8 -5.5 -5.7 -5.6 -5.5
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) 2.6 2.6 5.5 5.7 5.6 5.5
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 1.5 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.2
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -0.1 -1.3 -1.9 -2.1 -2.1 -1.7
Debt (% of GDP) 27.6 28.3 28.3 28.4 28.4 28.0
Primary Balance (% of GDP) 2.2 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 11.5 9.9 9.1 8.8 8.4 8.2
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2008-HICES and 2016-HICES. Actual data: 2015, 2016. Nowcast: 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using point-to-point elasticity (2008-2016) with pass-through = 1 based on GDP per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 79 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 93
adjustment of the highly subsidized fuel
Recent developments prices, including for utilities, and a 10
TURKMENISTAN percent rise in public-sector salaries, pen-
sions, and other government payments.
The official real GDP growth rate accelerat- The current account deficit remained high
ed slightly—from 6.2 percent in 2016 to an in 2017, although with some improvement
Table 1 2017 estimated 6.5 percent in 2017. Growth was due to a recovery in global hydrocarbon
Population, milliona 5.7 largely supported by more favorable terms prices and a substantial contraction in
GDP, current US$ billionb 42.4 of trade, primarily reflecting a recovery in imports. After falling in 2015-16, export
global gas prices, which rose by 24 percent revenues grew by 3.6 percent year-on-year
GDP per capita, current US$b 7355
year-on-year. China remains the largest in 2017; still not sufficient to close the ex-
School enrollment, primary (% gross)c 89.4 purchaser of Turkmen gas, while a price ternal gap. In contrast, imports continued
Life expectancy at birth, years d 67.6 dispute with Iran over gas supplies re- to decline, falling by 23 percent in 2017.
mains unresolved and has affected export The sharp drop in imports was due to
Sources: UNPD, Macro Poverty Outlook, and WDI.
Notes: revenues. In early 2018, Iran announced tighter trade regulations and significant
(a) UNPD staff estimates (2016). readiness to file a case with the Interna- pressures on the FX markets as the author-
(b) World Bank staff estimates (2017).
(c) Most recent WDI value (2014). tional Court of Arbitration. ities avoided tapping on their buffers,
(d) Most recent WDI value (2015). The domestic retail trade sector grew at an restricting liquidity in the FX markets.
annual rate of 19 percent in 2017, as an The monetary authorities continued to
expansion of credit and government trans- strengthen oversight and control of FX
fers supported consumption growth; the operations, and adopted restrictions that
transport and communications sector limited foreign currency withdrawals
Turkmenistan’s real GDP growth rate grew by 11 percent year-on-year, and the from cash, bank cards, and cross-border
rose by 6.5 percent year-on-year in 2017, service sector grew at an annual rate of 9 transactions in 2017. The drying up of FX
mainly supported by a recovery in hydro- percent. However, gross fixed investments liquidity in the domestic markets suggests
fell sharply (by almost 9 percent year-on- that a correction of the official exchange
carbon prices. The external and fiscal ac-
year), as flows of both domestic and for- rate (currently pegged at 3.5 manat per US
counts improved according to official da-
eign direct investments fell, dampening dollar) may need to be considered, along
ta, but inflation surged to double-digits, growth in the construction sector. Moreo- with other macroeconomic and structural
hinting at a possible buildup of imbalanc- ver, agriculture output increased by a reforms to reduce the external imbalances.
es. The rise of inflation and the gradual mere 5 percent, just below GDP growth, The Turkmen authorities continued their
suggesting less growth dividends for a fiscal consolidation efforts and balanced
removal of welfare subsidies for utilities
large share of the population employed in the state budget in 2017, compared to the
has negatively impacted the purchasing the agricultural sector. 1.3 percent deficit in 2016. Compared to
power of households. The country’s growth Consumer price inflation hiked from 6.2 government plans, revenue collection over
outlook remains positive, but risks are percent in the end of 2016 to 10.4 percent -performed by 1.8 percent in 2017, while
by the end of 2017. Inflation was driven by expenditures underperformed by 3.6 per-
tilted downwards, given the needed struc-
the high pressure on the foreign exchange cent, primarily due to cuts in capital
tural reforms aimed at boosting private- (FX) markets, which pushed up the prices spending and a gradual elimination of
sector development. of imported goods, as well as an upward welfare subsidies since the last quarter of
FIGURE 1 Turkmenistan / Real GDP growth and gas prices FIGURE 2 Turkmenistan / Exchange rate and oil prices
Percent Percent USD/TMT US$ per barrel
16 14.7 40 2.6 120
14 30 2.8
100
12 11.1 20 3.0
10.2 10.3
10 9.2 10 3.2 80
0
8 6.5 6.2 6.5 -10 3.4 60
6 3.6
-20 40
4 3.8
-30
20
2 -40 4.0
0 -50 4.2 0
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Real GDP growth (LHS) Change in gas prices (RHS) Exchange rate, TMT/US$ (LHS) Oil prices, average (RHS)
Source: State Statistics Committee of Turkmenistan. Source: Central Bank of Turkmenistan.
MPO 80 Apr 18
94 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
2017. Reportedly, civil servant wages, terms of trade) but slow progress on im- drop in energy prices, which may exacer-
pensions, and other core social transfers plementing the national strategy’s struc- bate external and domestic imbalances.
were protected. It should be noted that the tural reforms aimed at promoting non- Domestic risks include a low quality and
state budget does not represent the full traditional (non-hydrocarbon) exports. rapid credit expansion that may potential-
fiscal picture as an important share of Inflation would remain high while gradu- ly undermine the performance of the fi-
public spending is executed via extra- ally returning to single digits, assuming nancial sector, lower-than-expected re-
budgetary funds, including through di- further fiscal and monetary tightening. turns on state-funded projects, and the
rected lending. The positive outlook on gas prices and the stalling of structural reforms aimed at
Turkmenistan does not release official statis- robust external demand from China would diversifying the economy through private-
tics on household welfare, and little is help strengthen the external position. The sector development.
known about most recent labor market de- current-account deficit would narrow from An opening of the economy, an improve-
velopments. However, the gradual removal its peak level in 2016, largely on the back ment in the business regulatory environ-
of subsidies for utilities and rising inflation of the restrain on merchandise imports ment, an acceleration in the corporatiza-
is likely to have affected the real purchasing due to FX constraints. Over the medium tion and privatization of state-owned en-
power and living standards of households. term, the reduction on imports would also terprises, and more investments in human
follow in case the construction of the Turk- capital will be vital to boost private-sector
menistan—Afghanistan—Pakistan—India development and achieve the goals of the
Outlook (TAPI) gas pipeline project is delayed. medium- and long-term national develop-
More generally, however, a sharp reduc- ment strategies.
tion of imports driven by FX restrictions Limited access to economic opportunities,
The baseline scenario assumes a continua- could impinge on domestic price dynam- and lack of economic diversification re-
tion of fiscal consolidation, some moderation ics, and/or curtail the government’s ability main a major obstacle to inclusive growth,
in the buildup of external imbalances, and to proceed with ongoing investment pro- especially for households outside the capi-
(sustainable) external debt accumulation to jects, harming the growth prospects. tal city Ashgabat. Households in rural
help finance the still sizeable (but narrow- areas are more vulnerable to economic
ing) current account deficit. This baseline, downturns and the rising inflation, due to
however, is not without downside risks. Risks and challenges factors that include their limited access to
Turkmenistan’s outlook will remain high- jobs beyond the agricultural sector. Eco-
ly dependent on hydrocarbon prices and nomic diversification (beyond the gas and
the growth performance of its major trad- There are both external and domestic agricultural sectors) with further private
ing partner, China. Over the medium threats that raise country’s risk profile. sector growth would create more econom-
term, the real GDP growth rate is project- External risks include weaker-than- ic opportunities for households, including
ed to remain below 7 percent, assuming expected growth in trading partners, those in rural areas and secondary cities.
favorable tailwinds (including via the particularly in China, and an unexpected
TABLE 2 Turkmenistan / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2014 2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 10.3 6.5 6.2 6.5 6.3
Inflation: consumer price index, end of period 4.4 6.0 6.2 10.4 6.2
Current account balance (% of GDP) -6.4 -14.1 -21.0 -11.6 -11.5
of which: Exports of hydrocarbons (% of GDP) 42.0 29.9 16.6 14.7 14.4
Financial and capital account (% of GDP) 7.0 5.2 9.8 6.8 7.7
of which: Net foreign direct investment (% of GDP) 8.8 8.6 6.1 4.5 3.6
Fiscal balance (% of GDP) 0.9 -0.7 -1.3 -0.2 0.5
Public debt (% of GDP) 18.0 19.4 23.9 24.3 27.6
Sources: World Bank, International Monetary Fund.
Notes: e = estimate; f = forecast.
MPO 81 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 95
remained steady in the third quarter of
Recent developments 2017 at 9.4 percent, compared to 9.2 the
UKRAINE previous year. Real wages grew signifi-
cantly by 19 percent in 2017 in part due to
Growth remains weak due to key pending higher public-sector wages. This, together
reforms needed to strengthen investors’ with real growth of pensions, led to fur-
Table 1 2017 confidence. GDP grew by 2.5 percent in ther decline in poverty (consumption per
Population, million 44.8 2017 (and 2.3 percent in 2016) which is a capita below 5.5 USD/day in 2011 PPP) to
GDP, current US$ billion 112.9 weak recovery since it follows a cumula- 5.7 percent in 2017 from 6.4 percent in
GDP per capita, current US$ 2522 tive 16 percent contraction in 2014-2015. 2016 and 7.8 percent in 2015. Estimates of
International poverty rate ($1.9)a 0.1 Key sectors exhibiting relative strength poverty by the National Statistical Service
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2)a 0.5 such as manufacturing and domestic trade using an absolute poverty line comparable
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5)a 6.4 grew over 5 percent in 2017, while con- over time show much higher incidence
struction grew by almost 27 percent. In levels, but a similar modest decline to 51.1
Gini coefficienta 25.0
contrast, mining and electricity generation percent in 2016 from 51.9 percent in 2015.
Life expectancy at birth, yearsb 71.2 contracted due to the trade blockade with The fiscal deficit was within target in 2017
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. Donbas. The growth of fixed investment but spending growth, inflation, and the
Notes: has slowed in the second half of the year, current account deficit remain high. The
(a) Most recent value (2016), 2011 PPPs.
(b) Most recent WDI value (2015). while FDI remained weak at 2.1 percent of fiscal deficit remained flat and on target at
GDP in 2017, compared to 5 percent on 2.4 percent of GDP in 2017. However, ex-
average before the crises. Investor confi- penditures were up by 11.7 percent in real
dence has been affected by the slow pace terms and reached 42.6 percent of GDP
in adopting key reforms and delays in due to the increase in the minimum wage
Economic growth in 2017 remained mod- completing reviews of the IMF program (resulting in higher wages for teachers,
est at 2.5 percent for a second year in a given macroeconomic vulnerabilities and doctors, and civil servants), as well as
row, which is inadequate to reduce elevat- uncertainty surrounding the 2019 elec- higher spending on social programs. This
tions. CPI reached 13.7 percent at the end was balanced by strong revenue growth in
ed compared to pre-crisis levels. Foreign
of 2017, that is significantly higher than 2017, driven by payroll tax (20 percent in
investment and credit to the private sector the NBU target of 8+/-2 percent, due to real terms, due to the hike in wages), VAT
is anemic. Macroeconomic vulnerabilities growth of public sector wages and pen- (17 percent, due to higher proceeds from
going forward come from significant fi- sions. As a result, NBU raised its key poli- imports) and personal income tax (16 per-
cy rate to 17 percent in March 2018 from cent). Public and publicly guaranteed debt
nancing needs, fiscal pressures from high-
12.5 percent in April 2017. This has in- level remained high at 70.4 percent of
er public-sector wages and social benefits.
creased the cost of funds for local curren- GDP in 2017. The boost in wages and so-
Completing the pending reforms in ad- cy borrowing for both the government cial expenditures triggered inflationary
vance of elections in 2019 will be critical and the private sector. and current account pressures in 2017.
to mobilize adequate international financ- Poverty remains above pre-crisis levels, The current account deficit was at 3.5 per-
but has registered small decline I in 2017 cent of GDP in 2017. FDI remains weak
ing, maintain macroeconomic stability,
due to the modest economic recovery and and covered 60 percent of the CAD, with
and bolster investment. wage growth. The unemployment rate the remainder financed by public and
FIGURE 1 Ukraine / Real GDP growth and contributions to FIGURE 2 Ukraine / Actual and projected poverty rates and
real GDP growth real private consumption per capita
Percent, percentage points Poverty rate (%) Private consumption per capita (constant LCU)
20 50 25000
15
10 40 20000
5
30
0 15000
-5 20
-10
10000
-15 10
-20
5000
-25 0
2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
-30
2015-Q1 2015-Q3 2016-Q1 2016-Q3 2017-Q1 2017-Q3 -10 0
International poverty rate Lower middle-income pov. rate
Agriculture Manufacturing Domestic trade GDP Upper middle-income pov. rate Consumption pc
Sources: State Statistic Service of Ukraine. Sources: World Bank. Notes: see Table 2.
MPO 82 Apr 18
96 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
private borrowings. International reserves leads to optimizing the school and hospi- fiscal and financial sector imbalances, and
grew to $18.8 billion or an equivalent of tal network. Under an alternative scenario promote stronger economic growth.
3.4 month of imports. where reforms do not progress and the Macroeconomic vulnerabilities come total
IMF reviews are not completed, growth is fiscal financing needs of $18 billion in 2018
likely to remain at 2 percent, or potentially and 2019 that will require mobilizing
Outlook fall further if political and social stability about $8 billion in external financing. Ad-
deteriorates around the 2019 elections. ditional fiscal pressures come from the
The moderate poverty rate (under 5.5 USD/ rising public-sector wage bill and signifi-
Bolstering economic growth and address- day) is expected to decline further in 2018 cant spending on social programs, which
ing macroeconomic vulnerabilities will but remain elevated through 2019. As pub- will prove challenging to consolidate
require progress on the unfinished struc- lic spending is constrained, labor income through the 2019 elections.
tural reform agenda. Progress on the re- will become the most important driver of Financial sector weaknesses from high
form agenda and staying on track with increasing incomes for the bottom 40 per- nonperforming loans at 55% of total loans,
the IMF program would not only boost cent. Some rebound in the real sector, in- weak corporate governance of the domi-
potential growth, but also provide an cluding wage growth in the private sector nant state-owned banks, and weak finan-
important signal to strengthen investor will support disposable incomes and help cial position of the Deposit Guaranty
confidence. This would help stimulate a the poverty rate to gradually decline. How- Fund not only stand in the way of stimu-
sustained recovery in fixed investment, ever, the magnitude of this reduction will lating investment and growth, but also
financed by local sources and FDI, and depend on the growth prospects, especially pose significant fiscal risks.
boost growth to 4.0 percent by 2019. With in the sectors were most of the poor/ With real household incomes still below
agriculture and commodities expected to vulnerable are employed (trade, manufac- pre-crisis levels, continued weak econom-
remain relatively flat in 2018, the accelera- turing, agriculture, construction). ic growth of 2 percent going into the 2019
tion in growth is expected to come from elections could undermine overall politi-
manufacturing, construction, and ser- cal and social support for the broad re-
vices. Meeting the fiscal deficit target of Risks and challenges form effort launched since 2014.
2.5 percent of GDP will require better External risks related to possible decline
targeting of social programs, rationalizing in commodity prices and higher inflation
public sector staffing, and implementa- Elections scheduled in 2019 pose major in advanced economies that may result in
tion of the recently adopted education risks in adopting further reforms needed to higher external trade deficit and cost of
and health reform laws in a manner that mobilize international financing, address financing respectively.
TABLE 2 Ukraine / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices -9.8 2.3 2.5 3.5 4.0 4.0
Private Consumption -19.7 1.8 7.8 5.4 4.1 3.8
Government Consumption -0.4 0.0 3.3 4.5 3.2 1.6
Gross Fixed Capital Investment -9.2 20.1 18.2 14.9 9.0 9.2
Exports, Goods and Services -13.2 -1.6 3.5 8.0 6.4 5.9
Imports, Goods and Services -17.9 8.4 12.2 14.0 7.2 5.8
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices -8.8 2.4 2.5 3.5 4.0 4.0
Agriculture -4.4 6.0 -2.5 0.5 2.0 2.5
Industry -15.1 3.3 2.5 5.0 4.5 4.0
Services -7.3 1.4 3.4 3.6 3.6 4.2
Inflation (Consumer Price Index) 48.7 13.9 13.7 9.9 6.5 6.3
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) -0.2 -3.7 -3.5 -3.7 -3.3 -3.3
Financial and Capital Account (% of GDP) -0.2 3.4 3.3 3.7 3.3 3.4
Net Foreign Direct Investment (% of GDP) 0.2 0.2 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.5
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -1.2 -2.3 -2.3 -2.5 -2.7 -2.4
Debt (% of GDP) 79.7 81.2 72.3 75.1 73.5 68.4
Primary Balance (% of GDP) 3.0 2.0 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.6
International poverty rate ($1.9 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.1 0.1 .. .. .. ..
Lower middle-income poverty rate ($3.2 in 2011 PPP)a,b 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3
Upper middle-income poverty rate ($5.5 in 2011 PPP)a,b 7.8 6.4 5.7 5.2 4.0 3.4
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
(a) Calculations based on ECAPOV harmonization, using 2016-HLCS. Actual data: 2015, 2016. Nowcast: 2017. Forecast are from 2018 to 2020.
(b) Projection using neutral distribution (2016) with pass-through = 1 based on private consumption per capita in constant LCU.
MPO 83 Apr 18
Selected Country Pages ● 97
also grew, however, on the back of lower
Recent developments import prices and the very significant re-
UZBEKISTAN duction in import tariffs implemented in
September, which resulted in an expand-
GDP growth slowed to 5.3 percent in 2017 ed demand for imported goods. The trade
(from 7.8 percent in 2016), led by the de- balance was in surplus in 2017 (compared
Table 1 2017 celeration in domestic demand. Total to a deficit in 2016) thanks to the higher
Population, million 32.0 investment moderated relative to previ- commodity prices in the second half of
GDP, current US$ billion 41.2 ous years, while remaining the main 2017, and the recovery of food and manu-
GDP per capita, current US$ 1290 growth engine for the economy. This was facturing exports as the demand of Uzbek-
School enrollment, primary (% gross)a 102.1 possible thanks to the public investment istan’s trading partners firmed up. Over-
Life expectancy at birth, yearsa 71.1 program, which supported a range of all, the current account surplus strength-
sectors (transport, utilities, oil and gas ened further in 2017 compared to 2016,
Source: WDI, Macro Poverty Outlook, and official data. explorations, and housing) as well as owing not only to the stronger trade bal-
Notes:
public enterprises and private investment ance, but the recovery remittances.
(a) Most recent WDI value (2015). activity. On the other hand, private con- On September 5, 2017, the Central Bank of
sumption declined slightly in real terms Uzbekistan (CBU) liberalized the ex-
due to the pickup in CPI inflation, and change rate; the official rate depreciated
despite a recovery in remittance inflows from 4,210 UZS to 8,100 UZS per dollar, as
(which rose by 27 percent y/y in dollar it converged with the curb rate; the CBU
terms in the first 9 months of 2017, togeth- has pursued a managed floating of the
Uzbekistan’s real growth slowed in 2017,
er with the strengthening of economic currency thereafter. The authorities also
led by a deceleration in domestic demand, activity in Russia). abolished the mandatory sales of a portion
including investment as the key growth The average nominal monetary income of firms’ export revenues to the CBU at
driver. The medium-term outlook is favor- of the population grew by 12.3 percent the official exchange rate (“surrender re-
in 2017, supported by an increase in quirements”), widening the participation
able, thanks to the government’s ambi-
minimum salaries and pensions by 15 of the private sector in the foreign ex-
tious reform program (e.g., a liberalized
percent in December 2017 (vis-à-vis an change market. In preparation of the ex-
exchange rate regime, an enhanced policy average inflation of 12.5 percent in 2017, change rate liberalization, the CBU raised
framework and business climate), and the in line with the IMF’s methodology). the policy rate from 9 to 14 percent in June
improved external tailwinds. Going for- Higher food inflation negatively affected 2017, curtailing the strong credit expan-
mostly urban consumers, particularly sion that took place earlier in the year, and
ward, ensuring a sound reform imple-
among the bottom 40 percent households helping stabilize the banking-loans-to-
mentation—including by tackling the for whom food accounts for 61 percent GDP ratio at 43.1 percent in 2017
remaining risks—will be key to sustain- of total consumption. (compared to 26.6 in 2016). Official figures
ing inclusive and robust growth and se- Uzbekistan mitigated the impact of export suggest that non-performing loans (NPLs)
price declines in 2014-16 via increased were at 0.79 percent in Q2 2017 and 1.2
cure job creation.
export volumes. This trend continued in percent at the end of 2017 as per CBU esti-
the first half of 2017—albeit at a decelerat- mates; Moody’s assessed NPLs at 2.0-2.5
ing rate as capacity diminished. Imports percent in August 2017; these could be
FIGURE 1 Uzbekistan / Real GDP growth and contributions FIGURE 2 Uzbekistan / Poverty, GDP per capita, and small
to real GDP growth business development
Percent, percentage points GDP per capita, US$ Percent
10 2,500 60
50
8 2,000
40
6 1,500
30
1,000
4
20
500
2 10
0 0
0 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017*
Small business, % of GDP
Services Construction Agriculture GDP per capita, US$, lhs
Industry Net taxes GDP total National poverty rate, % of population, rhs
Source: Uzbekistan official statistics. Source: Poverty line is national data based on minimum food consumption at
2,100 calories per person per day and it excludes non-food items.
Note: Due to the lack of data access, the Bank cannot validate the official figures.
MPO 84 Apr 18
98 ● World Bank ECA Economic Update May 2018
higher after the exchange rate unification poverty reduction in the past. Income The current account surplus would nar-
given the currency exposures of key bor- distribution has become more equitable row as imports continue to rise in the face
rowers, particularly public enterprises. over time and the official Gini coefficient of trade liberalization, even as exports
During 2017 the government sustained a fell from 0.39 in 2001 to 0.29 in 2013. (both commodities and manufactures)
robust (but softer) public investment pro- However, the official unemployment rate maintain a positive growth, and re-
gram, while cutting back on current was 5.8 percent in 2017, higher than 5.2 mittances remain solid. Real GDP growth
spending to meet its state budget targets. percent in 2016. is projected to accelerate slowly to 5.5 per-
The authorities reduced direct taxes on cent by 2020 as the private business cli-
firms and citizens while increasing prop- mate improves on the back of the reform
erty and resource taxes in an effort to Outlook process, supporting an acceleration of
achieve revenue neutrality while support- private investment, including FDI.
ing economic activity. The government While data limitations do not allow for
launched a privatization program and Robust growth is expected to continue at poverty projections, we expect that in-
sold 542 state objects in 2017 with budget about 5 percent in 2018-19, but job crea- creased income growth and the sustained
receipts of 0.3 percent of total budget reve- tion may take longer to pick up, as invest- robust net remittances in 2018 will allow
nue. The government also drew from its ments may not return quickly to pre-2017 some progress in poverty reduction over
significant fiscal buffers (at the Uzbek levels. Fiscal activity (including through the near term.
Fund for Reconstruction and Develop- UFRD lending) and bank credit are pro-
ment, UFRD, a reserve fund) to cover the jected to become less expansionary than in
debts of largest bank and industry public the past to help reign on inflation, which Risks and challenges
enterprises (particularly in the energy is expected to remain elevated as liberal-
sector) that were affected by the deprecia- ized prices continue to adjust. Budget
tion of the official exchange rate. As a re- spending would be geared towards miti- Uzbekistan economy’ upside and down-
sult, the augmented budget (including the gating the impact of the exchange rate side risks are broadly balanced. On the
state and UFRD activity) incurred a larger adjustment on the vulnerable population, upside, there are benign prospects for com-
deficit of -3.3 percent of GDP in 2017, rela- as well as supporting critical public enter- modity prices, and accelerated private in-
tive to a -0.6 percent of GDP a year earlier. prises to gradually converge towards vestment (including as FDI) thanks to the
The official poverty rate declined slightly greater sustainability and cost-recovery, authorities’ bold reform agenda. On the
from 12.5 percent in 2016 to an estimated and sustaining the public investment pro- downside, a slower recovery in the Russia’s
12.4 percent in 2017. Still robust economic gram. Monetary policy is expected to be economy, potential delays in other struc-
growth, small business development, and tighter than in previous years, also aiming tural reforms and higher inflation could
social safety net programs have driven at containing inflation from trending up. undermine growth and job prospects.
TABLE 2 Uzbekistan / Macro poverty outlook indicators (annual percent change unless indicated otherwise)
2015 2016 2017 e 2018 f 2019 f 2020 f
Real GDP growth, at constant market prices 7.9 7.8 5.3 5.0 5.1 5.5
Private Consumption 1.1 1.0 -0.3 1.2 1.2 2.2
Government Consumption 7.2 -12.8 -8.3 -7.6 -4.3 -1.1
Gross Fixed Capital Investment 9.5 9.5 7.1 6.9 7.0 7.5
Exports, Goods and Services 5.6 11.6 13.9 18.5 17.4 16.0
Imports, Goods and Services -2.1 -3.6 7.1 16.4 16.9 17.2
Real GDP growth, at constant factor prices 7.8 7.9 5.3 5.0 5.1 5.5
Agriculture 6.8 6.6 2.0 3.6 3.7 4.4
Industry 8.5 6.9 4.8 3.7 3.8 4.1
Services 8.0 9.0 7.1 6.1 6.2 6.5
Inflation (Private Consumption Deflator) 8.5 8.0 12.5 19.5 12.9 9.1
Current Account Balance (% of GDP) 0.7 0.7 3.7 0.4 -1.0 -1.4
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) -1.3 -0.6 -3.3 -1.3 -1.2 -0.2
Debt (% of GDP) 9.2 10.5 24.5 22.3 20.8 21.2
Primary Balance (% of GDP) -1.2 -0.5 -3.2 -0.8 -0.7 0.5
Source: World Bank, Poverty & Equity and Macroeconomics, Trade & Investment Global Practices.
Notes: e = estimate, f = forecast.
MPO 85 Apr 18
WORLD BANK ECA ECONOMIC UPDATE MAY 2018
Cryptooccuurrencies and Blockchain
With growth in Europe and Central Asia likely at its peak,
this report addresses two questions. How well is the
region prepared for an expected slowdown? How well
has the economic upswing been used to adjust to the
digital revolution? The report specifically focuses on
cryptocurrency and blockchain activities in the region.
ISBN (electronic): 978-1-4648-1299-6
© 2018 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
Some rights reserved
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is available under the
Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
IGO license (CC BY 3.0 IGO)
http://creativecommons.org
/licenses/by/3.0/igo.

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/Item_2a_-_Cryptocurrencies_and_tokens-done.pdf
cryptocurrencies
and tokens
ECB FXCG update
September 2018
Crypto Media coverage is High
Institutionalisationof crypto markets is gaining momentum
The infrastructure of cryptocurrencymarkets is still very much
in its infancy from an institutional point of view, but it has
Crypto Custodian Secures Insurance from Lloyds
evolved hugely over the past five years, with the focus shifting
from pure trading towards settlement and custody issues.
Kingdom Trust, which provides custody services for 30 digital asset
investments, has secured insurance for digital assets held on its
FXWeek, 31.08.2018
qualified custody platform through Lloyd’s of London.
CryptocurrencyWill Replace
Profit & Loss, 28.08.2018 National Currencies by 2030
Times, 04.05.2018
Thai central bank kicks off digital currency project
FCA welcomes firms working on crypto-assets to latest sandbox cohort.
Thailand's Central bank has kicked off a project with R3
and eight banks on the development of a digital currency
The Financial Conduct Authority's regulatory sandbox continues to gather
(CBDC) for use in domestic wholesale funds transfers
momentum, with 29 firms -including some working with crypto-assets -
getting the go-ahead to join the initiative's fourth cohort
Finextra, 23.08.2018
Finextra, 03.08.2018
5
AGENDA
• Definition: Crypto-assets are stored and exchanged electronically without the need for trusted intermediaries
• Growth of Crypto-assets market over the last four years
• Risks and opportunities are multiples for investors and issuers.
• Regulation: Different countries have adopted a variety of approaches to token offerings.
• Industryeffort: number of community platforms and working groups have emerged.
• Looking forward: What happen next ?
3 Source: Global digital Finance: Taxonomy for Cryptographic Assets
Definition: Crypto-assets are stored and exchanged electronically
without the need for trusted intermediaries (1/2)
Tokensare legal instantiations of a share of an asset, a set of permissions, or a set of claims that are held by the bearer or bearers of said
token. A token might take a physical from –such as a lottery ticket –or it might be a digital representation of a physical asset (e.g.
factional ownership of real estate or of luxury goods such cars or paintings), a set of permissions (e.g. the right for a one-off or perpetual
discount for goods/services on an online platform) or a set of claims, (e.g. the electronic representation of a debt contract).
Digital tokens exist within a variety of network forms including the traditional “hub and spoke” architecture in which a central entity
maintains token network activity; however, the primary interest of this definition is the particular subset of digital tokensthat exists within
distributed or decentralized networks popularly referred to as “crypto assets”.
Crypto-assetsare digital assets*that users store and exchange electronically in a peer-to-peer waywithout the need for trusted
intermediaries, and that are enabled by a network of computers running publicly-accessible DLT software, which applies cryptography.
Crypto assetsare of interest for their newness and their rapid proliferation. The technology underpinning the creation of most
cryptoassets–blockchaintechnology –was popularized with the publication of the Bitcoin “Whitepaper” in 2009. Within less than a
decade, the industry developed from virtually non-existent into a thriving ecosystem comprising more than 1600 cryptoassets, a total
market capitalisationof over 250 billion USD, and total funds raised from investors via the sale of cryptoassetsof almost 20 billion USD.
An important advantage of cryptoassetsover traditional tokens is the possibility to build specific, automatically-executed management
and business logic directly into the decentraltoken infrastructure via “smart contracts”.
A popular example would be a cryptoassetswhich is automatically sent out to a buyer who has paid its sales price denominated in
another cryptoassets. A more innovative example would be an automatically distributed insurance token payout once a specific event
has happened (such as a delayed flight).
4 Source: Global digital Finance: Taxonomy for Cryptographic Assets
Definition: Crypto-assets are stored and exchanged electronically
without the need for trusted intermediaries (2/2)
The Global Digital Finance taxonomy provide a common set of labels for crypto-tokens (herein referred to as “cryptoassets” or “tokens”). These labels will help to
better position cryptoassetswithin general global regulatory frameworks more consistently. The taxonomy contains three top-level label categories, which are
not necessarily mutually exclusive
Examples
• Tokens whose intrinsic features are designed to serve as a general purpose store of value, medium of
exchangeor means of payment, and/or unit of account. Similar to a currency and designed to work as a,
• bitcoin (BTC)
“Payment Token” frequently referred as a “coin” or “digital money”
Cryptocurrencies • Ripple (XRP)
• Do not require traditional intermediaries for exchange (e.g. banks, PSPs) and production (e.g. Central
Banks). Legal status as a currency is controversial
“Financial Asset • Designed to work as a medium of exchange within a limited ecosystemand to offer additional feature, • EOS
such as representing right to access product or serviceor ownershipof assets(e.g. shares, bonds)
Tokens” • Tron(TRX)
• Hosted on top of an existing public DLT and typically issued in ICOs (Initial Coin Offerings), a means for
Digital Tokens
fundraising that avoids traditional intermediaries (e.g. VCs, banks, stock exchanges) • Tether (USDT)
• Tokens that are inherently consumptive in nature, because their intrinsic features are designed to serve as, • Ether
Consumer Tokens or provide access to, a particular set of goods, services or content. • Waves
• The most well-known example of a Consumer Token is probably Ether, which was marketed, sold, and
• Bitshares
serves as “fuel” for the Ethereumblockchain.
Central Bank • Publicly-accessible digital form of fiat currencyissued by the state and w/ legal tender status. Not a crypto-asset. Could enable users
digital currencies to store and exchange value outside banks in regulated way. No real-life examples beyond ideas (e.g. e-krona at the Swedish Central
(CBDC) Bank)
*Digital asset: anything that exists in a binary, electronic format and comes with the right to use. Source: Credit Suisse, “Blockchain 2.0”, 2018; Deutsche Bank,
“Cryptocurrencies and blockchains”, 2017; Banquede France, “The emergence of bitcoin…”, 2018; Oliver Wyman report; Internal analysis
5
Growth of Crypto-assets market over the last four years
Fundraising:ICOs now dominant
Bitcoin: growth Investments & trading: spike in 2017 sourcefor blockchain startups
Confirmed transactions PROXY Market capitalization of crypto-assets Total funding of blockchain startups,
(bitcoin blockchain, per day) (USD B, year-end) by source (USD B)
Reduction drivers
3.8
350K Growth drivers •Regulatory scrutiny ICOs
•Public interest •Bans on online ads, Equity
300 •Investor base credit card purchases, 3.2
anonymous trading
•Coins/tokens available
250 •Media coverage of
•Futures launched
+385% bubble concerns
200 3.3 87%
1.9
2.8
150
617 1.2
100 +4.000% 432 1.6
Crypto- 1.0
50 367
currencies 85%
0 11 6 7 18 66 Tokens 15% 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.5 13%
’12 ’13 ’14 ’15 ’16 ’17 ’18 ’13 ’14 ’15 ’16 ’17 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
9 May ‘18 9 May ‘18 ‘16 ‘17 ‘18
Source: Coinmarketcap; Blockchain.info; CB Insights, TokenData; Business Insider, Forbes; MyBraadband; BIS; Internal analysis
6
Despite rapid growth, crypto-assets market remains small
Payments Investments & trading Fundraising Conditions for future growth
Current maximum capacity Current global market value Funds raised, 2017 •Consumers and businesses adopt
(transactions per second) (USD billions) (USD billions) crypto. applications
Market
•Standardizationin practices of
56.000 80.000+ 189
intermediaries
164
•Scalability & cost: new
Small vs. technologies allow scaling crypto.
traditional applications at lower costs than
Insignificantvs. asset classes Small vs. existing alternatives (e.g.
Tech payments)
alternatives (<10%) traditional
(<1%) 22.000+ methods •Cybersecurity: vulnerabilities in
432*
mgmt. and access to hardware are
(<10%)
7.800 mitigated, minimizing cyber attacks
3-4 20 450 367 66 6 •Central Banks adopt CBDC or
legalize crypto-assetsin unified
Bitcoin PayPal Visa Crypto- Tokens Gold Stocks ICOs VCs IPOs
way globally
Ethereum currencies Deposits
•Growth in ICOs funding •Crypto. companiesare regulated
4-year growth in 4-year growth in market (Q4'17 vs. Q4’16): +100x Legal and supervised
daily transactions
(bitcoin network, proxy**; 427% capitalization (crypto- +4.000% •ICOs account for 87%of •KYC/ALMallow integration of
2017 vs. 2013) assets, 9 May ’18 vs. YE’13) total funding for blockchain crypto. companies to banking
startups (Q1’18) system
*As of May 9th, 2018. **Bitcoin is the most popular crypto-asset, accounting for 37% of the crypto-assets market value.
Source: Coinmarketcap; Blockchain.info; CB Insights; TokenData; Business Insider; Forbes; MyBraadband; BIS; EY; Internal analysis
7
Risks and Opportunities
Risks:
Generally, the token markets are nascent and are made up of a number of communities who have different goals and motives. The risks are
multiples for investors and issuers. A few of the risks will be;
• Lack of standardisation
• Certain investors may not be sufficiently sophisticated to assess the risks involved
• Consumer protection laws and guidelines need to be clarified for crypto market
• KYS/ALM
• Cyber security
• Risk of market abuse
Opportunity of Cryptoassets
The characteristics of cryptoassets place them in a position to offer significant benefits to society. While far from an exhaustive account of
their potential benefits, three characteristics stand out.
1. They can increase transparency: The technical underpinnings of cryptoassets enable the deployment of marketplaces for the exchange
tokens that are significantly more transparent than existing financial systems. As such, there is the opportunity for significant reductions
in the prevalence of fraud, money laundering, terrorist financing and other undesirable or illegal activities within both newly created
cryptoassets and existing physical/digital tokens migrated to a cryptoassets form.
2. They can be deployed and operated simply and at low cost: Cryptoassetshave the potential to significantly increase the operational
efficiency of developing and operating token networks and associated marketplaces for those tokens. This lowers the barriers to creating
efficient marketplaces for products that are not currently tokenized [e.g. asset classes such as real estate, wine, and diamonds] facilitating
increased liquidity, and lower costs price discovery, and less fragmented markets for these products.
3. They enable experimentation: Recent deployments of cryptoassets have sought to establish new business models predicated on
previously unimagined categories of tokens such as P2P markets for electricity or decentralized computing, in which consumers can rent-
out their unused computing resources securely to other internet users, and get paid automatically and transparently via cryptoassets.
8 Source: Global digital Finance: Taxonomy for Cryptographic Assets
Regulatory harmonization and enforcement are key, yet challenging
Governments views on crypto-assets Supervisors and Regulators views
EXAMPLES •Developing regulatory framework
•Japan: goal to nurture innovative FinTechservices; •Acknowledges concerns around speculative nature of
cryptocurrencies legal payment method; no trading tax crypto-assets, not financial stability; need for
harmonization in EU due to international nature of the
•Switzerland: first-mover in ICO regulations, setting
Front- global standards; “Crypto-nation”: liberal approach market
runners without compromising financial standards •DNB and AFM regulatory sandbox* available; inviting banks
for experiments
•Singapore: permissiveregulations, which do not
distinguish between fiat currency and cryptocurrencies; •Acknowledges riskscryptocurrencies are suitable for
Central Bank does not foresee Lehman-like meltdown money laundering, terrorist financing, scams, deception
and speculative hype (risk of a bubble) and ICOs are
•UK: priority in FS innovation agenda; task force (FCA,
vulnerable to fraud, deception and manipulation
Government, BoE) to present recommendation in Q218
•Calls for coordinationbetween national and international
together w/ EU; regulatory sandbox*available
legislators and regulators
•US: no federal regulation & inconsistenciesbetween
Fence-
states, e.g. BitLicenceoperational in New York; pioneer •Developing regulatory framework, to be published in 2H18;
sitters allowing trading of cryptocurrency-related derivatives all the banks engaged with crypto-assets to be supervised;
cryptocurrencies should fall under AML-IV
•South Korea: uncertainty towards previously supportive
•Currently, crypto-assets are not recognized as money nor
stance; anonymous trading banned in Jan. 2018; ICO (ECB)
payment means; should not be accepted as collateral
regulation under development
•China: bannedICOs & cryptocurrency-related web •Small market size poses limited threat to financial stability;
Opponents (IMF)
access, froze related bank accounts; discourages mining banks and regulators need to remain vigilant
*Regulatory sandbox is a “testing ground in which businesses can test innovative products, services and business models without immediately incurring all normal
regulatory consequences of engaging in the activity in question”.
Source: Group Research; press coverage; official websites; Internal analysis
9
Industry effort
Number of community platforms and working groups have
emerged, with the objective of providing support and practical
solutions to companies wanting to achieve best practice.
Such platforms are improving public (and regulator) perception of
token companies, who are increasingly being seen as willing to
ensure investor protection. The following initiatives have been
particularly popular among market participants for their work:
Global Digital finance, The Brooklyn Project, Crypto Valley
Association.
Global Digital Finance (GDF) is an industry body that drives the
acceleration and adoption of digital finance technologies to support
the next era of digital commerce. They have conducted a
consultation on the Code of Conduct for Cryptoassetsand a
supporting Taxonomy.
The consultation closed on 31st August 2018, and we received over
500 individual submissions of feedback from over 100 individuals
and organizations.
The Brooklyn Project is a platform that creates solutions to address investor protection issues and dispel uncertainty for market participants.
The project has support from a range of academics, token companies and regulators, and has produced a range of open-source toolsto assist
companies, such as template documents, code snippets and thought leadership pieces.
The Crypto Valley Association is an independent association which supports market participants in Switzerland through policy
recommendations, projects across verticals, research, and by organizing conferences, hackathons, and other industry events. The association
has a defined mission, core values and both general and specific token sale codes of conduct for use by its members.
10 Source: Global digital Finance: Taxonomy for Cryptographic Assets
Looking forward
Despite the collapse in total coin market cap this year and also the failure of numerous opportunistic or less well thought through ICO projects,
innovation in the crypto space continues apace, via either deployment of extensive funds raised during the hype of Q4 2017 issuance or
increasingly professional ICO white papers;
Whilst very few Tier 1, 2, 3 traditional banks overtly have a crypto offering, there is lots of ‘quiet’ investigation, exploration and
experimentation behind the scenes;
The big story of 2018 is the on-going evolution of ‘institutional grade’ crypto infrastructure. For example:
• Certain exchanges specialising in larger size liquidity provision, wholesale standard ‘self-regulation’ egCoinbasePro (GDAX), Coinfloor
• Growth of OTC market, 24/7, in size. Jump Trading,Cumberland, Flow Traders
• Crypto specific fiat banking services egNoble
• Institutional custody egCoinbaseCustody, Vo1t
Banks and Fintechcompanies are exploring DLT solutions and some solution are starting to emerge.
11
Executive Summary Recap
• Definition: Crypto-assets are digital assets stored and exchanged electronically without a need for trustedintermediaries. Crypto.
applications address financial needs of Retail and Institutional clients, i.e. Payments, Investments & Trading and Fundraising (ICOs)
• Despite rapid growth, crypto-assetmarketis still small compared to traditional asset classes. In order to scale up, several critical conditions
need to be met. Among those,regulatoryframework harmonization and enforcement are key, yet challenging. Despite disparate positions,
banks are building option to enter this field.
• Risks: Generally, the token markets are nascent and are made up of a number of communities who have different goals and motives. The
risks are multiples for investors and issuers. They will range from fromthe lack of standardization, lack of customer protection laws, the lack
of Control and transparency concerning use of funds and the lack of Crypto understandings from certain investors. KYS/ALM and Cyber
security are also high risks in this domain.
• Regulation: There is a great deal of uncertainty surrounding the legal and regulatoryenvironment worldwide with regards to token
offerings for both token issuers and token holders. Different countries have adopted a variety of approaches to token offerings,ranging from
blanket bans (such as in China) to the application of existing laws or the development of new frameworks to encourage token issuers to
conduct offerings within their jurisdiction (such as Gibraltar). This has led to a situation where there is a clear lack of regulatory consistency
on a cross-border basis.
• Industryeffort: number of community platforms and working groups have emerged, with the objective of providing support and practical
solutions to companies wanting to achieve best practice. While these initiatives lack the teeth that regulators have, they are auseful vehicle
for establishing best practice, as they can foster an eco-system of good conduct that could serve as a guiding framework for policymakers,
and simultaneously help token companies avoid some of the pitfalls identified above. Further, such platforms are improving public (and
regulator) perception of token companies, who are increasingly being seen as willing to ensure investor protection. The following initiatives
have been particularly popular among market participants for their work: Global Digital finance, The Brooklyn Project, Crypto Valley
Association.
12 Source: Global digital Finance: Taxonomy for Cryptographic Assets
APPENDIX
Glossary
Concept Definition
DLT Acronym for “Distributed ledger technology”. Software and protocolsthat usecryptography and enable a log of transactions to be recorded across a
network of computers in a peer-to-peer way and without the need for a central trusted intermediary.
Digital asset Anything that exists in a binary, electronic format and comes with the right to use. Examples: electronic document file, e-mail, crypto-assets and
Central Bank digital currency.
Crypto-asset Digital asset that users store and exchange electronically in a peer-to-peer way without the need for trusted intermediaries, and that are enabled by
a network of computers running publicly-accessible DLT software. There are twotypes of crypto-assets: cryptocurrencies and tokens.
Cryptocurrency Crypto-asset designed to work as a peer-to-peer medium of exchange or means of payment, frequently referred as a “coin” or “digital money”.
Examples: bitcoin (BTC), Ether (ETH) and Ripple (XRP).
Token Crypto-asset designed to work as a medium of exchange within a limited ecosystem and to offer an additional feature, such as representing right to
access product or service or ownership of assets (e.g. shares). Examples: EOS, Tron(TRX) and Tether (USDT).
CBDC Acronym for “Central Bank Digital Currency”. Publicly-accessible digital form of fiat currency issued by the state and w/ legal tender status. Not a
crypto-asset, as does involve a trusted intermediary. No real-life examples beyond ideas such as the e-krona at the Swedish Central Bankexist.
Crypto. company Companies that: 1. are not supervised and regulated by banking authorities; and 2. operate crypto. payment services, operate crypto. investment and
trading services, raised funds via ICOs or mine cryptocurrencies.
Crypto. application Crypto. paymentservices, crypto. investment and trading services, ICO/fundraising services and cryptocurrency mining.
Crypto. payment Services that enable users to send and receive funds in fiat currency and that are enabled by cryptocurrencies or tokens. Examples: Bitpay,Circle Pay,
service Veemand Ripple’s xRapidservice.
Crypto. exchange Type of company that enable users to buyand sell cryptocurrencies and/or tokens for investment and trading purposes. Crypto. exchanges provide
crypto. investment and trading services.
ICO Acronym for “Initial Coin Offering”. A means offundraising that some companies use and that avoids traditional intermediaries (e.g. VCs,banks, stock
exchanges). Companies or organizationsthat raise funds via ICOs give tokens or cryptocurrencies that can be traded in crypto. exchanges to investors.
In return, they receive cryptocurrencies or fiat money from investors. The status of ICO-generated tokens as an equity security is controversial
Source: Internal analysis
14
AS OF MAY. 2018
Unique value proposition of main crypto-assets
Cryptocurrencies Tokens
Rank Name Value proposition Rank Name Value proposition
1 Bitcoin Digital gold 1 EOS Scaling decentralised applications
2 Ethereum Programmablecontracts and money 2 TRON In-app-purchases
3 Ripple Enterprise payment settlement network 3 VeChain Supply chain item Ids
4 Bitcoin Cash Bitcoin clone 4 Tether Price= 1 USD
5 Litecoin Faster bitcoin 5 ICON Connecting independent blockchains
6 Cardano Layered currencyand contracts 6 OmiseGO Banking, remittance and exchange
7 Stellar DigitalIOUs 7 BinanceCoin Pay Binanceexchange fees
8 IOTA Internet-of-things payments 8 Zilliqa High throughput blockchain network
9 NEO Chinese-market Ethereum 9 Aeternity Decentralized apps (prototype)
10 Monero Private digital cash 10 Ontology Multi-chain project +collaboration platform
Note: rank as of May. 9th, 2018.
Source: TechCrunch, “100 cryptocurrencies described in four words or less”, Nov. 2017; CoinMarketCap; white papers; Internal analysis
15

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/2othp72-done.pdf
The crypto ecosystem:
key elements and risks
Report submitted to the G20 Finance Ministers and
Central Bank Governors
July 2023
This publication is available on the BIS website (www.bis.org).
© Bank for International Settlements 2023. All rights reserved. Brief excerpts may be reproduced or
translated provided the source is stated.
ISBN 978-92-9259-670-5 (online)
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
BIS report to be submitted ahead of the July 2023 G20 FMCBG meeting
Contents
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1
2. The key elements of the crypto ecosystem ............................................................................................................... 1
2.1 Unbacked crypto ............................................................................................................................................ 2
2.2 Stablecoins ....................................................................................................................................................... 2
2.3 Smart contracts and decentralised finance ......................................................................................... 3
3. Structural flaws and risks ................................................................................................................................................... 5
3.1 Structural flaws ............................................................................................................................................... 5
3.1.1 Fragmentation and congestion ................................................................................................................ 5
3.1.2 Stablecoins and the search for a nominal anchor ............................................................................ 7
3.1.3 False decentralisation claims and their consequences ................................................................... 9
3.2 Risks................................................................................................................................................................... 11
3.2.1 Within the crypto ecosystem .................................................................................................................. 11
3.2.2 Risks in DeFi ................................................................................................................................................... 13
3.2.3 Interconnectedness with the traditional financial system ........................................................... 14
3.2.4 Risks to emerging market and developing economies ................................................................ 15
3.3 Addressing the risks in crypto ................................................................................................................ 16
3.4 Addressing data gaps: Project Atlas ..................................................................................................... 17
4. Conclusions .......................................................................................................................................................................... 19
References .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 20
Glossary ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 23
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks i
1. Introduction
The market capitalisation of the crypto ecosystem – notwithstanding a significant decline in 2022 – lies in
the trillions of dollars, and there are thousands of crypto coins in circulation. The spread of crypto has
been global in nature and driven by a wide range of investors.
In theory, the crypto universe builds on the premise of decentralisation. Rather than relying on
central bank money and trusted intermediaries, crypto envisages that the recordkeeping of transfers is
provided by a multitude of anonymous validators. Decentralised finance, or “DeFi”, seeks to replicate
conventional financial services in a decentralised way within the crypto universe, often underpinned by the
medium of exchange role of stablecoins. DeFi incorporates innovations such as programmability and
composability on blockchains.1 Such systems are “always on”, allowing for worldwide transactions 24
hours per day, seven days per week.
Recent events revealed a wide divergence between the crypto vision and reality. Although crypto
operates under the banner of decentralisation, in practice new centralised intermediaries have played a
key role in channelling funds into the crypto universe and intermediating within it. The implosion of the
FTX crypto exchange is only the most notable manifestation of the sector’s vulnerabilities. Rather than
providing a more resilient financial architecture, crypto displayed the same well known vulnerabilities of
traditional finance, but in amplified ways.
This report reviews the key elements of the crypto ecosystem and assesses its structural flaws. It
then goes over the risks that it poses and discusses options for addressing them. It also identifies data
gaps and discusses ways to alleviate them.
The report has three key takeaways. First, the crypto ecosystem is subject to a high degree of
fragmentation and is characterised by congestion and high fees. This would have been the case even if it
had stayed true to its original decentralised ethos. These structural flaws derive from the underlying
economics of incentives of validators rather than from technology. And while crypto has offered some
elements of genuine innovation, these can be replicated or embedded in the safer and more trusted
traditional finance system (BIS (2023)). Second, despite an original ethos of decentralisation, crypto and
DeFi often feature substantial de facto centralisation, which introduces various pain points. A prime
example concerns stablecoins, which piggyback on the credibility of the central bank’s unit of account and
may pose risks to monetary sovereignty. Third, while DeFi mostly replicates services offered by the
traditional financial system, it does not finance any activity in the real economy but amplifies known risks.
As growth is driven mainly by the speculative influx of new users hoping for high returns, crypto and DeFi
pose substantial risks to (especially retail) investors. In sum, crypto’s inherent structural flaws make it
unsuitable to play a constructive role in the monetary system (BIS (2022)).
2. The key elements of the crypto ecosystem
This section describes the main components of the crypto ecosystem. It begins by tracing the development
of Bitcoin and blockchain technology. It then discusses the growing role of centralised intermediaries in
1 A blockchain is a digital ledger (like a spreadsheet) that records transactions in a way that is secure, transparent and immutable.
Information is stored across a network of computers. In contrast to the centralised nature of traditional databases, every
participant has a copy of the same ledger. When a new transaction is made, it is broadcasted to the network and verified by
multiple computers using complex algorithms. Once verified, the transaction is added to the ledger as a “block” and cannot be
altered without consensus from the network.
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 1
the ecosystem. In particular, it discusses stablecoins, which are most often issued by centralised entities
and grew from a bespoke solution to the inherent volatility of crypto assets to becoming a pillar of the
crypto ecosystem. The section concludes with a discussion of smart contracts and the decentralised finance
applications that build on them. The technical terms used throughout this report are defined in the
Glossary.
2.1 Unbacked crypto
The birth of crypto dates to the introduction of Bitcoin in 2009: a decentralised, peer-to-peer means of
transferring value on a shared public ledger (ie a public blockchain using distributed ledger technology
(DLT)). In its original formulation, crypto was characterised by not being backed by any asset, as well as by
a stated claim to reduce the influence of intermediaries through decentralisation (Nakamoto (2008)).
Ownership of crypto assets and transactions with them are verified by decentralised validators
and recorded on the public ledger. If a seller wants to transfer cryptoassets to a buyer, the buyer (identified
through their cryptographic digital signature) broadcasts the transaction details, eg transacting parties,
amount or fees. Validators (in some networks called “miners”) then compete to verify the transaction, and
whoever is selected to verify appends the list of transactions to the blockchain and is compensated in fees
paid in cryptoassets. The updated blockchain is then shared among all miners and users. In this way, the
history of all transactions is publicly observable and tied to specific wallets, while the true identities of the
parties behind transactions (ie the owners of the wallets) remain undisclosed. In this sense, transactions
on blockchains are pseudo-anonymous. By broadcasting all information publicly, the system verifies that
every transaction is consistent with the history of transfers on the blockchain, eg that the cryptocurrency
actually belongs to the seller and has not been spent more than once.
As cryptoassets started attracting broader attention from potential investors, centralised entities
played a greater role in channelling funds into crypto coins. In particular, centralised exchanges, which
facilitated the conversion between Bitcoin, other cryptoassets and fiat money, contributed to rising crypto
prices by attracting new participants, in a self-reinforcing loop. Centralised intermediaries (notably
platforms such as Mt Gox in the early days, and more recently Binance, Coinbase, Kraken and FTX until its
sudden collapse in late 2022) have reasserted their key role in the crypto ecosystem time and time again.
This system has come to be known within the crypto space as centralised finance (CeFi), and its ups and
downs have contributed to the volatility of cryptoasset prices (Graph 1.A).
2.2 Stablecoins
Stablecoins have established themselves as the main medium of exchange within the crypto ecosystem
and as a gateway into it. They are so-called because they aim to maintain a stable value relative to a
specified asset or pool of assets. Stablecoins are usually pegged to a numeraire, almost always the US
dollar, but can also target the price of other currencies or assets (eg gold or even other cryptoassets). In
this way, they seek to overcome high volatility and low liquidity to play the role of a medium of exchange
in the crypto universe. Stablecoins also play a key role in the DeFi ecosystem (see next section).2
Stablecoins come in two main types, depending on how they attempt to maintain their peg (FSB
(2022)). Most stablecoin arrangements are managed by a centralised intermediary and are “asset-backed”.
The underlying assets can include US government bonds, short-term corporate debt or bank deposits. The
centralised intermediary invests the underlying collateral and coordinates the coins’ redemption and
2 The use of stablecoins avoids frequent and costly conversion between crypto and bank deposits in sovereign currency and
allows users to leave their wealth within the crypto ecosystem, without exposing it to substantial volatility risk.
2 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
creation. The most prominent stablecoins are Tether, USD Coin (USDC) and Binance USD. “Algorithmic
stablecoins”, in contrast, aim to automatically rebalance supply via arbitrage with a paired volatile token
to maintain the peg. They are typically not backed by real world assets, with the most prominent example
being the failed TerraUSD stablecoin.3
Despite repeated setbacks and outsize volatility, crypto grew until late 2021 Graph 1
A. Long-term price of crypto assets B. Market size of crypto and DeFi1
USD, log scale USD trn
a b c d 48.6
2.5
16.2
2.0
5.4
1.5
1.8
1.0
0.6
0.5
0.2
0.0
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
2021 2022 2023
Bitcoin Ether
Market cap: Bitcoin Ether Stablecoins
DeFi coins Others
a Bankruptcy of Mt Gox. b Bursting of ICO bubble. c TerraUSD and Luna collapse. d Bankruptcy of FTX.
1 End-of-week values. Categories comprise the largest seven stablecoins, 59 DeFi coins and 64 other cryptocurrencies. DeFi coins correspond
to cryptocurrencies issued by DeFi platforms and with a market capitalisation-to-total value locked ratio smaller than 50, as reported by
DeFiLlama. Total value locked refers to the size of capital pools underpinning DeFi protocols. For more details, see Table A2 from Auer (2022).
Sources: BIS (2022); Bloomberg; CoinGecko; BIS.
2.3 Smart contracts and decentralised finance
Since the advent of Bitcoin, many other blockchains and associated crypto coins have entered the scene,
most notably Ethereum and its associated native coin Ether in 2015 (Graph 1.B). Ethereum and many of
the newer blockchains allow for “programmability”, ie they give developers the option of building
applications on top of their blockchain through the use of so-called smart contracts.
Smart contracts are self-executing code that triggers an action if certain pre-specified conditions
are met. They can automate some market functions and to some extent obviate intermediaries that are
traditionally required to make decisions. They are therefore better thought of as unattended contracts
(Neilson (2021)). The underlying code is publicly available (ie open source) and can be scrutinised. As smart
contracts cannot directly access information that resides “off-chain”, ie outside the specific blockchain,
they require so-called oracles as mediators to provide such data.
3 For example, an algorithmic stablecoin X could aim to keep a one-for-one peg to the US dollar by being convertible into one
dollar’s worth of another cryptocurrency Y and vice versa. Should X fall to 99 cents, a user could purchase X on an exchange
for 99 cents and then exchange their X for $1 worth of new units of Y. There are of course exceptions to the broad categorisation
used in this report. The most prominent is DAI, which is non-algorithmic and is backed by a mix of unbacked crypto (eg Ether)
and stablecoins (eg USDC).
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 3
An important feature of smart contracts is their “composability”, ie the capacity to combine
different components in the system. Users can perform complex transactions on the same blockchain by
combining multiple instructions within one single smart contract – like “money lego”.
Programmability also opened the door to DeFi, a new ecosystem for the provision of crypto
services. DeFi aims to offer traditional financial services and products on the blockchain, with the declared
objective of greater transparency and cutting out the middlemen to lower costs. DeFi protocols combine
multiple smart contracts to provide lending, borrowing and trading services within the crypto ecosystem.
Decentralised applications (dApps) are graphical interfaces that allow users to interact with protocols from
their computers or smartphones. While they are not strictly necessary to interact with the DeFi ecosystem,
as users could set up their own interface, they are the entry point to DeFi for all but the savviest
participants.
Stablecoins play an important role in the DeFi ecosystem by serving as a medium of exchange in
a wide range of activities (Graph 2.A).4 For one, they provide liquidity to the DeFi ecosystem by allowing
users to move in and out of decentralised applications. Relatedly, stablecoins serve as trading pairs for
other cryptoassets in decentralised exchanges, thereby allowing users to trade crypto without having to
convert back to fiat currency, hence reducing transaction costs. Moreover, stablecoins are widely used on
DeFi lending and borrowing platforms, where users borrow and lend stablecoins against collateral in the
form of other cryptoassets. Because of this key role, turnover in stablecoins generally dwarfs that of other
cryptoassets (Graph 2.B).
Stablecoins and DeFi grew in tandem Graph 2
A. Stablecoins gained ground as capital in DeFi apps B. Turnover of stablecoins dwarfs that of other
climbed1 cryptoassets4
USD bn Ratio
200 0.20
150 0.15
100 0.10
50 0.05
0 0.00
Turnover
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Tether
Lhs: Total value locked in DeFi2 Stablecoins (other than Tether)
Rhs: Tether USD Coin Binance USD Dai Other cryptoassets
Other stablecoins3 DeFi coins5
Bitcoin
1 Stacked areas plot stablecoins’ value in circulation. The selected stablecoins are those ranked as the top four by market capitalisation as of
21 June 2023. 2 Total value locked refers to the size of capital pools underpinning DeFi protocols. The sample includes 2,939
protocols. 3 Includes 61 other stablecoins. 4 Based on the top 20 cryptoassets by market capitalisation as of 21 June 2023 (four
stablecoins, seven DeFi coins and nine other cryptoassets). Turnover is the monthly average of the daily volume-to-market capitalisation ratio
from 21 May to 21 June 2023. 5 Cryptoassets issued by DeFi platforms.
Source: Aramonte et al (2021).
4 See Aramonte et al (2021) and Schär (2021).
4 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
The main types of financial activity in DeFi, such as lending, trading and insurance, are the same
as those already available in traditional finance. Lending platforms allow users to lend out their stablecoins
with interest to borrowers that post other cryptocurrencies as collateral. Decentralised exchanges (DEXs)
represent marketplaces where transactions occur directly between cryptocurrency or stablecoin traders,
and prices are determined via automated mathematical formulas. On DeFi insurance platforms, users can
insure themselves against some risks within the crypto system, eg the mishandling of private keys,
exchange hacks or smart contract failures, receiving cryptoassets as compensation.
Yet, DeFi activities almost exclusively involve exchanging one stablecoin or crypto coin for
another, and do not finance activity in the real economy. In this sense, the system is mostly self-referential
and used for speculation in coins.5 Growth is driven mainly by the continuous influx of new users hoping
for high returns. Indeed, recent evidence suggests that rising crypto prices are followed by significantly
higher adoption of crypto trading apps, as new users are lured by the prospect of further gains.6
3. Structural flaws and risks
This section highlights that, despite the potential for genuine technological innovation, crypto has inherent
structural flaws that pose serious risks not only to its own stability and safety, but also to the traditional
financial system. The section first reviews the main structural flaws of the crypto ecosystem, including
congestion, fragmentation and the need to borrow credibility from sovereign money. It also discusses the
problems arising from the need for centralisation. The section then summarises the main risks, splitting
them into risks within the crypto ecosystem (including risks to market integrity, consumer protection and
privacy), risks specific to DeFi and risks arising from the interconnectedness with the traditional financial
system. The section then discusses options for addressing the risks posed by crypto, before closing with a
discussion of the data gaps that currently hinder monitoring.
3.1 Structural flaws
3.1.1 Fragmentation and congestion
Crypto – even in its original, fully decentralised, form – suffers from inherent limitations of permissionless
blockchains that lead to fragmentation of the system, accompanied by congestion and high fees.7 Tracing
the reasons for fragmentation highlights why the limitations are not technological but rather stem from
incentive structures.
On the blockchain, self-interested validators are responsible for recording ownership and
transactions. However, in the pseudo-anonymous crypto system, they have no reputation at stake and
anonymity impedes accountability. Instead, they must be incentivised through sufficiently high monetary
rewards to report truthfully and sustain the system of decentralised consensus. Honest validation must
5 In April 2023, the Crypto Council for Innovation issued an open call for case studies “to tell clear stories of how this innovation
has created a positive impact”. The Crypto Council for Innovation provided three examples, with the most important being the
ability to send financial aid through the use of stablecoins slightly faster than using standard financial institutions.
6 See Auer, Cornelli, Doerr, Frost and Gambacorta (2022) and Cornelli et al (2023). Note that in some cases, cryptocurrency can
be used to buy products in non-crypto businesses. For example, El Salvador made Bitcoin legal tender in 2021, yet usage
remains low (Alvarez et al (2022)).
7 See BIS (2018) and Boissay et al (2022).
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 5
yield higher returns than the potential gains from cheating. Should rewards become too low, individual
validators would have an incentive to cheat and steal funds, jeopardising overall security (Budish, 2022).
A common way to reward validators so as to maintain incentives is to limit the capacity of the
blockchain, thereby maintaining high fees sustained by congestion (Huberman et al (2021)). As validators
can choose which transactions are validated and processed, periods of congestion see users offering
higher fees to have their transactions processed (Graph 3.A). Congestion and high fees also mean that
payments systems based on decentralised blockchains will remain comparatively slow and expensive.
Blockchain congestion leads to fragmentation Graph 3
A. Network congestion leads to high gas fees on the B. Fragmentation of layer 1 blockchains2
Ethereum network1
% of total assets locked
300
200
100
0
0.44 0.73 1.2 1.98
Millions of transactions per day, logarithmic scale
1 Outliers larger than 450 Gwei (10–9 ETH) are excluded from the graph. 2 Based on total value locked which corresponds to the aggregate
of all funds locked in a DeFi smart contract.
Source: Boissay et al (2022).
The blockchain capacity problem is a manifestation of the so-called scalability trilemma (Buterin
(2021)). By their nature, permissionless blockchains can achieve only two of the three properties: security,
decentralisation and scalability. Security – in the sense of truthful reporting and preventing manipulation
of the transaction history – is enhanced through incentives and decentralisation. But sustaining incentives
entails congestion, which limits scalability. It is this incompatibility between three key attributes that
impairs blockchains’ ability to serve as an efficient payment system and crypto’s ability to serve as money.
Limited scalability has resulted in the fragmentation of the crypto universe, as newer blockchains
with more capacity that possibly cut corners on security entered the fray. These newer blockchains often
aim for higher transaction limits, even if these come at the cost of greater centralisation and weaker
security. Simply put, on blockchains that rely on a larger network of validators and where each validator
has only limited influence over the consensus, it is harder for one validator to manipulate the ledger. But
this also means that every transaction takes longer to be validated, implying higher costs for users, and
hence higher required rewards. Such blockchains therefore become congested more rapidly. On
blockchains with fewer validators, on the other hand, there is more potential for a smaller group of
validators to manipulate the network.
6 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
)HTE
9–01(
seef
sag
egarevA
100
75
50
25
0
2021 2022 2023
Layer 1 networks: Ethereum Terra
Binance Avalanche Fantom
Solana Tron
Other layer 1 and 2 networks
The Terra blockchain was just the most glaring example of a large number of new entrants
(Graph 3.B). As recently as the beginning of 2021, Ethereum accounted for almost all of the total value
locked in DeFi protocols. By May 2022, this share had dropped to 50%. The widening wedge (red area)
accounted for by the failed Terra blockchain is particularly striking, as the collapse of the Terra blockchain
highlights the tendency to fragmentation through crypto’s vulnerability to new entrants who prioritise
market share and capacity at the expense of decentralisation and security.
A system of competing blockchains that are not interoperable introduces new risks of hacks and
theft. In this context, interoperability refers to the ability of protocols and validators to access and share
information, as well as validate transactions, across different blockchains.8 Interoperability of the
underlying settlement layers is not achievable in practice, as each blockchain is a separate record of
settlements. Nevertheless, so-called cross-chain bridges have emerged to permit users to transfer coins
across blockchains. Yet, most bridges rely on only a small number of validators, which – in the absence of
regulation and legal accountability – users need to trust not to engage in illicit behaviour. As the number
of bridges has risen, they have stood at the centre of several high-profile hacks, highlighting vulnerabilities
to security breaches stemming from weakness in blockchain governance. Such hacks could further lower
trust in the broader fintech sector, standing in the way of greater adoption (Chen et al (2023), Doerr et al
(2023)).
The fragmentation of the crypto universe stands in stark contrast to the network effects that take
root in traditional networks. Crypto’s reliance on decentralised validators and the attendant fragmentation
leaves no role for money as a coordination device, making crypto unsuitable as a monetary system.
Traditional networks, on the contrary, are characterised by the “winner takes all” property, whereby more
users flocking to a particular platform beget even more users. Such network effects are at the heart of the
virtuous circle of lower costs and enhanced trust in traditional platforms.
3.1.2 Stablecoins and the search for a nominal anchor
Fiat-backed stablecoins, the dominant form of stablecoin, piggyback on the credibility of the central bank’s
unit of account. Having a unit of account means that everyone uses it as a common measure of the
economic value of products and services, greatly facilitating financial and economic transactions. In the
real world, providing the unit of account for the economy is the primary role of the central bank. While
there is no such thing as a central bank in the crypto universe, it needs to have a unit of account, like any
monetary system. Stablecoins attempt to serve this unit-of-account function, but they do so by tying their
value to fiat currencies, such as the dollar, whose value is guaranteed by a central bank. In this sense,
stablecoins are the manifestation of crypto’s existential search for a nominal anchor.
Yet stablecoins suffer from a number of shortcomings that threaten their claim to stability. For
one, they are subject to an inherent conflict of interest whereby issuers are incentivised to invest in risky
assets. The robustness of stablecoin stabilisation mechanisms hence depends crucially on the quality and
transparency of their reserve assets, which are often lacking.9 In addition, they benefit neither from the
regulatory requirements and protections of bank deposits and e-money, nor from the credibility of the
central bank defending the peg. Moreover, as stablecoins are transferable liabilities and transactions do
not settle on the central bank balance sheet, their exchange rate can fluctuate away from par.10
8 See Buterin (2016).
9 See Arner et al (2020); Catalini and de Gortari (2021); Frost et al (2020); Gorton and Zhang (2022); Ahmed et al (2023).
10 In other words, stablecoins cannot guarantee the “singleness of money” (see Garratt and Shin (2023)).
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 7
Box A
The collapse of the TerraUSD stablecoin
The use of TerraUSD (UST) grew rapidly over 2021–22 so that, prior to its collapse in mid-2022, it was the third largest
stablecoin, with a peak market capitalisation of almost $19 billion. An algorithmic stablecoin, UST aimed to keep a
one-for-one peg to the US dollar by being convertible into one dollar’s worth of another cryptocurrency, Luna, on the
Terra blockchain, and vice versa. For example, should Terra fall to 99 cents, a user could purchase UST on an exchange
for 99 cents and then exchange their UST for $1 worth of new units of Luna on the Terra platform. A crucial aspect of
this arrangement was that users would be willing to exchange UST into Luna only if Luna’s market capitalisation
exceeded that of UST. As Luna had no intrinsic value, its valuation stemmed primarily from the influx of speculative
users into the Terra ecosystem. To attract new users, the associated lending protocol Anchor offered a deposit rate of
around 20% on UST. As long as users had confidence in the stable value of UST and the sustained market capitalisation
of Luna, the system could be sustained.
However, once investors lost confidence in the system’s sustainability, the arrangement unravelled. In May
2022, the value of UST plummeted to almost zero (Graph A1.A). As UST dropped below its peg, a classic run dynamic
took hold as investors sought to redeem their funds. Users burned their UST on a large scale to mint one dollar’s
worth of new Luna, in the hope of selling Luna while it still had some value. However, given the size and speed of the
shock, confidence evaporated, meaning that there were not enough parties willing to buy all the newly minted Luna
coins – and so the price of Luna collapsed.
The TerraUSD implosion and fragilities in stablecoins Graph A1
A. Terra and Luna coins dropped in B. Tether briefly lost its peg and C. Investors moved to USD Coin and
value rapidly suffered $10bn in outflows1 other asset-backed stablecoins
USD USD USD USDT bn USD bn
a
a
100 1.00 1.00 82 80
0.99 80
75 0.75
70
0.98 78
50 0.50
60
0.97 76
25 0.25
a
50
0.96 74
0 0.00
0.95 72 40
Q1 2022 Q2 2022 Q1 2022 Q2 2022 Q2 2022
Price: Terra (Luna) (lhs) Price (lhs) Market capitalisation: Tether
TerraUSD (rhs) Circulating supply (rhs) USD Coin
a TerraUSD and Luna collapse starting on 9 May 2022.
1 The price corresponds to the low price.
Source: BIS (2022).
The UST/Luna implosion spilled over to the largest stablecoin, Tether, which dropped to a value of $0.95
before recovering. It saw outflows of over $10 billion in the subsequent weeks (Graph A1.B). The de-pegging has been
linked to Tether’s unwillingness to provide details about its reserve portfolio: investors worried about whether Tether
had enough high-quality assets that could be liquidated to support the peg. This argument is supported by the inflows
experienced by the regulated stablecoin USDC (with better documented reserves), with funds probably coming from
Tether (Graph A1.C).
8 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
A case in point has been the above-mentioned implosion of TerraUSD, which in May 2022 lost
nearly its entire value over the course of a few days (Box A). In the aftermath, several fiat-backed
stablecoins saw large-scale redemptions, temporarily losing their peg. Redemptions were more
pronounced among stablecoins whose issuers did not disclose the composition of reserve assets in detail,
presumably reflecting investors’ worries that such issuers might not be able to guarantee conversion at
par. Indeed, stablecoins have proved to be not that stable.
3.1.3 False decentralisation claims and their consequences
Crypto proponents argue that decentralisation guarantees the safety of the system. However, there is often
a de facto concentration of decision-making power. While centralisation is not a structural flaw per se, it
introduces new risks and invalidates arguments made by proponents of crypto and DeFi that stress its
purportedly decentralised nature.
Concentration arises partly from congestion effects in decentralised platforms with proof-of-work
systems. To reduce congestion, newer proof-of-stake blockchains require validators to post their coins as
collateral, which gives them a better chance of being paid for validating the next block. However, this can
lead to a concentration of power and coins among a small number of validators, since operational costs
are mostly fixed (Auer, Frost and Vidal Pastor (2022)).
“Contract incompleteness”, ie the inability to write contracts that can cover all future possible
eventualities, is another reason for centralisation. It is recognised that centralisation can allow economic
agents to overcome contract incompleteness. This has an analogue in the DeFi space in the concept of
“algorithm incompleteness”, namely the inability to write code that covers all potential situations and
outcomes. Consequently, DeFi platforms must have some degree of central governance to address these
gaps in code and outline strategic and operational priorities. This element of centralisation is typically
represented by “governance tokens”, held to a large extent by platform developers and early investors (ie
insiders) who vote on proposals (Graph 4.A). With the increasing centralisation of validators, the risk of
attacks and hacks increases, not least as these centralised nodes are often unregulated.11
Insiders control token allocation and centralised exchanges dominate volumes Graph 4
A. Coins are often allocated to insiders B. Weekly trading volume1
USD bn USD bn
Binance
Solana
400 40
Terra
Celo
300 30
Avalanche
Algorand
200 20
Near
Polkadot
Cardano 100 10
Ethereum
Tezos 0 0
0 10 20 30 40 50
Q2 21 Q4 21 Q2 22 Q4 22 Q2 23
% of initial coin allocation
Centralised (lhs) Decentralised (rhs)
1 Centralised = Binance and Coinbase; Decentralised = Curve.fi, PancakeSwap (v2) and Uniswap (V2). Weekly averages of daily values.
Sources: Auer, Frost and Vidal Pastor (2022); BIS (2022).
11 See IOSCO (2022).
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 9
DeFi’s inherent need to obtain information from the real world also represents an important
impediment to decentralisation. While DeFi, in principle, relies on decentralised and consensus-based
trust, the reporting of data that underpins smart contracts relies on oracles. Oracles process and source
the data, ultimately transmitting this information to the blockchain. As oracles require trust and exhibit
various degrees of centralisation, this gives rise to the “oracle problem” (Box B). In the extreme, some use
a single data source or have a single person/entity in charge of transmitting information to the platform.
This introduces a single point of failure and leaves room for untruthful reporting, as whoever oversees the
Box B
The oracle problem
Decentralised finance (DeFi) needs to import data from the real world, which creates a practical conundrum: it is
impossible to import data into a blockchain without involving a third party (the oracle).
The oracle problem arises because oracles introduce centralisation to a decentralised system, overriding the
reliance on consensus as a trust mechanism (Graph B1). Oracles with a high degree of centralisation rely on a single
data source or have a single person/entity responsible for transmitting information to the platform. This reliance on
one source introduces a single point of failure and leaves room for manipulation when the data source is not
trustworthy.
Three main risks emerge. First, the anonymity of agents in a DeFi setting may increase incentives for
malicious behaviour. In traditional finance (TradFi), when manipulations are detected, the identities of the
manipulators are typically revealed, and those individuals are held accountable for malpractice by supervisory
agencies and others. The open and transparent nature of DeFi may make detection of fraud easier, but the inability
to identify and hold responsible individuals accountable makes DeFi systems more susceptible to manipulation.
Second, the lack of regulation or oversight of oracle providers makes recourse less clear in DeFi. Although there are
legal challenges surrounding information falsification in TradFi, established legal systems provide the basis for
assigning penalties, compensating victims and, in some cases, clawing back funds. Third, the terms of smart contracts
and the data inputs they reference on the blockchain are immutable, which makes errors or illegal actions more costly
than in traditional financial settings. Once data are validated on the blockchain, they cannot be corrected, and all
smart contracts that reference that data will continue to do so.
Technological efforts to decentralise oracles involve adding consensus mechanisms to information provision
processes, for instance through a group of independent blockchain oracles. These solutions try to reintroduce
decentralised trust at the expense of speed and efficiency, since the more networks are added to guarantee truth, the
more delays will be introduced throughout the lifecycle of a smart contract.
The oracle problem Graph B1
Oracle
Centralised
Decentralised
Information
DLT
Smart contract
Dev 1 Dev 2
Source: adapted from Duley et al (2023).
10 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
oracle has the ability to corrupt the system by misreporting data. Currently, there are no clear rules as to
how oracle providers are incentivised or vetted, or who is held accountable if a smart contract acts upon
incorrect off-chain information.
Finally, centralisation is also present in crypto trading activities, where investors rely mainly on
centralised exchanges (CEXs) rather than decentralised ones. While the latter work by matching the
counterparties in a transaction through so-called automated market-maker protocols, CEXs maintain off-
chain records of outstanding orders posted by traders – known as limit order books – which are familiar
from traditional finance. CEXs attract more trading activity than DEXs because of their lower costs
(Graph 4.B). Even though crypto CEXs mimic some functions of traditional exchanges, they are not subject
to the same regulation and supervision.
Reliance on CEXs can jeopardise users’ investments, as these exchanges have repeatedly shown
to be lacking even basic risk management controls and governance standards. The most prominent
examples include the failure of bitcoin exchange Mt Gox in 2014, which resulted in the loss of more than
$400 million worth of bitcoin, and the bankruptcy of FTX in November 2022, which caused losses to its
customers of billions of dollars, among many others.
3.2 Risks
When discussing the risks of crypto, it is important to note that, to date, the ecosystem is largely self-
referential. Activities almost exclusively involve exchanging one stablecoin or cryptocurrency for another,
without financing any activity in the real economy. In consequence, crypto currently poses significant risks
mainly to investors in the crypto space, while links to the real world remain limited.
3.2.1 Within the crypto ecosystem
Crypto poses significant risks to investors. Rising crypto prices tend to lure retail investors into the space,
with an expectation of quick and large capital gains (Graph 5.A).12 These expectations are generally not
met, however, as a large share of users in most economies tend to lose money (Graph 5.B).
The events of 2022 illustrate vividly the risks faced by investors, especially smaller ones.13 The
aftermath of the collapses of TerraUSD and FTX saw a striking pattern: the number of daily active users
across the major platforms increased markedly, suggesting that users attempted to weather the storm by
shifting their portfolios away from stressed tokens into safer alternatives, including asset-backed
stablecoins (Graphs 6.A and 6.B). However, behind this flurry of activity, large investors appear to have
benefited at the expense of smaller holders. Indeed, owners of large wallets reduced their bitcoin holdings,
whereas medium-sized and especially smaller holders increased their holdings (Graph 6.C).
The lack of control mechanisms in many crypto firms implies that investors’ money is at high risk
if these firms face funding challenges or the threat of bankruptcy. For instance, following its failure, it
emerged that FTX owed more than $3 billion to its unsecured creditors – mainly users of the exchange
who had transferred their funds there. FTX was not the only case in which this happened. Many of the
customers of other crypto firms that failed in recent years have been unable to access their funds or have
had to wait a very long time to do so.14
12 See Auer, Cornelli, Doerr, Frost and Gambacorta (2022).
13 See Cornelli et al (2023).
14 With the start of the latest crypto winter and in the aftermath of the demise of TerraUSD, there were numerous failures beyond
FTX, with those of Celsius, Voyager, BlockFi, Three Arrows Capital and Genesis being the most prominent.
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 11
Retail investors have chased prices, and most have lost money Graph 5
A. More users trade when the Bitcoin B. …and a large share of users in nearly all economies probably lost money2
price increases…
USD Millions of users
60,000 0.4
45,000 0.3
HK
30,000 0.2
% of users that SG
downloaded an app
when Bitcoin price > $ 20,000:
> 80%
15,000 0.1
70−80%
60−70%
50−60%
10−50%
0 0.0 N/A
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Lhs: Bitcoin price (daily)
Rhs: Crypto exchange app DAUs1
1 Cross-country monthly average of daily active users (DAUs). Calculated on a sample of more than 200 crypto exchange apps over 95
countries. 2 The use of this map does not constitute, and should not be construed as constituting, an expression of a position by the BIS
regarding the legal status or sovereignty of any territory or its authorities, the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and/or
the name and designation of any territory, city or area. Based on data up to mid-December 2022.
Sources: Auer, Cornelli, Doerr, Frost and Gambacorta (2022); Cornelli et al (2023); CCData; Sensor Tower.
In stormy seas, “the whales eat the krill” Graph 6
A. As prices tumbled… B. …all users traded more…1 C. …but whales sold while krill
bought2
31 Mar 2022 = 100 t–1 = 100 t–1 = 100
a b
100
160 102
75
140 101
50
120 100
25
0 100 99
Q1 2022 Q3 2022 t–5 t–4 t–3 t–2 t–1 t0 t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5 t–5 t–4 t–3 t–2 t–1 t0 t+1 t+2 t+3 t+4 t+5
Bitcoin Terra (Luna)
Days from the episode Days from the episode
Ether FTX-token
Terra (Luna): FTX: Terra (Luna): FTX:
Binance Large
Coinbase Medium
FTX Small
a TerraUSD and Luna turmoil, 8 May 2022. b FTX collapse, 7 November 2022.
1 Based on daily active users of crypto exchange apps. 2 Based on the number of BTC held in addresses with balances of less than 1 BTC
(small), 1–1,000 BTC (medium) and more than 1,000 BTC (large).
Sources: Cornelli et al (2023); IntoTheBlock; Sensor Tower.
12 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
Crypto is probably also used for illicit activities such as money laundering, the financing of
terrorism and tax evasion. Pseudo-anonymity and lack of oversight certainly contribute to these risks. The
use of crypto thereby presents important challenges for regulators and law enforcement agencies, as they
may find it hard to track and trace crypto transactions. To address these risks, measures aimed at better
governance, anti-money laundering (AML) and combating the financing of terrorism (CFT) are needed.
Effective governance frameworks can ensure that market participants are operating in a transparent and
accountable manner, promoting the integrity of the financial system. The Financial Action Task Force has
developed guidance on registration and licensing requirements for service providers in the crypto space
(FATF (2021, 2022)).
3.2.2 Risks in DeFi
The DeFi ecosystem amplifies several risks that are also present in the traditional financial system (FSB
(2023)). Of particular relevance are operational risks, its reliance on leverage and the complex web of
interconnections within the system, which make it particularly prone to episodes of instability.
Operational risks
While all services are subject to operational risk, a number of DeFi features make such risks particularly
acute. These may cause operational disruptions and hinder the ability to deliver services and products.
The first type of operational risks in DeFi are those linked to governance frameworks. As these
frameworks are often unclear, opaque, untested and easy to manipulate, they can mislead users about the
claims and safeguards of DeFi activities. In addition, there is uncertainty over what ex post remedial
protections are available to participants. For instance, developers and founders at times lack the incentives
to maintain DApps once they receive the initial investment. This may expose users to losing their money
in “rug pulls” – a risk that is compounded by the difficulty of making developers and founders accountable
for their actions, as their economic incentives are unclearly expressed and poorly disclosed and the system
features a pseudo-anonymous structure.
The need for centralisation poses further problems. The holding of voting power across major
decentralised autonomous organisations (DAOs) – which are responsible for managing many DApps – is
highly concentrated, implying that in practice only a few controlling actors can propose, pass or implement
initiatives (Feichtinger et al (2023)). Disagreements about governance decisions can occur, leading to forks
and network splits. This can materialise in losses for investors and a loss of confidence in DeFi protocols,
which could spill over to other markets.
The second type of operational risk in DeFi is linked to its dependence on the proper functioning
of the underlying blockchains. Disruptions to the blockchain caused by outages, network congestion or
consensus failure can affect the cost, functioning and performance of the blockchain and the DeFi services
that rely on it.
A third source of operational risk is the use of smart contracts. Smart contracts need to account
for many possible states of the world before they are deployed, creating complexity. In turn, such
complexity increases the potential for coding errors and consequent unexpected behaviour. Immutability
implies that it is not possible to correct mistakes and reinstate the status quo ante without the consensus
of blockchain validators.
Fourth, oracles and bridges can be an additional source of operational risk in DeFi. The
functioning of many DeFi protocols critically relies on oracles. Errors in, manipulation of, or attacks on
oracles may trigger actions in one protocol (eg liquidations or margin calls) with unanticipated negative
consequences in other protocols (eg in algorithmic reserve assets or collateral management). Therefore,
oracles could be critical in initiating or propagating a shock.
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 13
A similar risk is related to cross-chain bridges. Separate blockchains are not interoperable,
requiring bridges that connect protocols across various blockchains. Typically, a bridge will hold (collect)
assets from one chain or protocol and issue or release assets on another chain or protocol for the same
value. This allows asset holders to transact across chains or protocols but creates repositories potentially
holding large amounts of assets, rendering them targets for theft and misappropriation.
Collateral and leverage
Due to pseudo-anonymity, financial intermediation in DeFi largely rests on the re-use of collateral. The
reason is that the identity of borrowers and lenders is hidden behind cryptographic digital signatures.
Lenders thus cannot access information such as borrowers’ credit scores, but require crypto collateral to
align incentives.15
The ubiquitous presence of collateral leads to procyclicality and can trigger sharp adjustments in
prices that have knock-on effects on other market segments. In booms, appreciating prices mean that
collateral values increase, while collateralisation ratios fall. In busts, loans are liquidated as prices – and
hence collateral values – decline sharply, suppressing lending activity. This mechanism is further amplified
when borrowed cryptoassets are used as collateral for additional loans (akin to rehypothecation). The
specific features of DeFi relating to the management of leverage – in particular, the automatic liquidation
of collateral – are a primary reason why deleveraging dynamics in DeFi can be especially strong.
Automated risk management tools serve to protect the lender but raise financial stability
concerns for the DeFi ecosystem due to their system-wide effects. In these protocols, loans for which
collateral falls in value below a certain threshold trigger an automatic liquidation. If these liquidations
occur under stressed conditions, collateral may be forcibly liquidated into a market with low liquidity,
pushing collateral prices down further, leading to contagion. In the traditional financial system, such self-
reinforcing dynamics can be alleviated via orderly liquidation at central counterparties or by human
intervention, or it can be arrested by market circuit breakers. Such mechanisms are absent in DeFi.
Intra-connectedness and complexity
DApps are considerably interconnected with each other. Further, the DeFi ecosystem as a whole is closely
intertwined with other parts of the crypto ecosystem. Thanks to the composability properties of DeFi,
DApps often employ multiple smart contracts and interact with multiple protocols, which create strong
interdependencies across smart contracts. As a result, problems in a single smart contract could propagate
across the entire ecosystem. As such, composability can amplify the reach and speed of financial contagion
within DeFi or lead smart contracts to interact in unexpected ways. Compounding this issue is the fact that
smart contract code is widely re-used, such that seemingly independent contracts may in practice be
subject to the same vulnerabilities. In sum, the various components of DeFi are highly interconnected, so
that assessing one element of the crypto system in isolation falls short of assessing its role in the overall
ecosystem.
3.2.3 Interconnectedness with the traditional financial system
The interplay between the crypto market, traditional finance and the real economy has remained limited
so far (Auer, Farag, Lewrick, Orazem and Zoss (2022)). As crypto remains a largely self-referential vehicle
used mainly for speculation, this is perhaps not surprising. In fact, the existing links result in large part
from crypto’s need to interact with traditional finance to sustain its growth. However, institutional investors
and households continue to show interest in crypto despite the events of the past year. Hence the potential
for these linkages to grow further cannot be ignored.
15 Aramonte et al (2022) develop these arguments in more detail.
14 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
Among these linkages, the relationship between crypto and the core banking sector is of
particular importance. The fall in crypto prices that started in the second half of 2022 did eventually spill
over to the traditional financial system. In March 2023, for instance, California-based Silvergate Bank –
widely touted as a key “crypto bank” – had to cease operations after haemorrhaging a large amount of
client deposits. Similarly Signature Bank, which also specialised in serving the crypto industry, was wound
down by authorities shortly thereafter. These cases highlight that a business model that is highly exposed
to crypto can be problematic for the banking sector.
Banks could also increase connections to crypto through credit provision to counterparties with
crypto exposures or through custody and other crypto-related services to their clients. Recognising those
risks, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) recently endorsed a global prudential standard
for banks’ exposures to cryptoassets (BCBS (2022)). Moreover, risks along the bank-crypto nexus extend
beyond (direct and indirect) exposures because of the potential negative externalities associated with
banks channelling funds into the crypto ecosystem, given their role as the mainstay of the monetary
system. Along with banks, other financial entities such as family offices, hedge funds and asset managers
could also increase their crypto investments, lured by the potentially high returns.
Tokenisation of claims on real-world assets, such as stocks or real estate, is another way through
which the interconnections between traditional finance and crypto could grow. This could result in the
growth of crypto itself, as new money gets channelled into such tokenised assets. It could also engender
a more complex web of interconnections between crypto and traditional finance as the activities of the
entities in these two ecosystems become more intertwined. In this scenario, the systemic importance of
the crypto ecosystem could increase substantially.
Crypto’s growing interconnectedness with traditional finance and the real economy may also
pose a threat to monetary sovereignty. The availability of stablecoins, in particular, may facilitate
cryptoisation, ie the substitution of local currencies with crypto-based ones.16 During periods of
macroeconomic instability and depreciating exchange rates, holders of domestic fiat currencies might shift
into alternative currencies, putting additional pressure on the domestic currency itself. Such a behaviour
may result in the loss of monetary sovereignty for domestic monetary authorities as well as the crowding
out of funding for local financial institutions, with long-term consequences for the overall monetary and
financial stability of these countries. To be sure, the risk of currency substitution is always present and it is
incumbent upon each jurisdiction to manage it properly. However, the existence of crypto and stablecoins
can substantially increase the likelihood of such scenarios materialising, as it makes currency substitution
much easier in practice. Should stablecoins be issued by big tech companies, taking advantage of the self-
reinforcing data-network-activities loop that enables them to exploit ever-growing network effects (Shin
(2019)), the threat to monetary sovereignty may be greatly exacerbated.
Interconnections between crypto and the traditional financial system can work both ways. For
instance, as a consequence of the bank turmoil in March 2023, some stablecoins lost their peg – most
notably USDCoin after disclosing that a substantial amount of its cash reserve was deposited in Silicon
Valley Bank. Stablecoins that used USDCoin as a reserve asset also broke par, whereas other stablecoins
traded at a premium. These events demonstrated that it is likely not possible to develop truly stable
stablecoins, ie stablecoins that can maintain their peg against all circumstances, even if they invest mainly
or exclusively in safe assets.
3.2.4 Risks to emerging market and developing economies
Several risks related to crypto and stablecoins are exacerbated in emerging market and developing
economies (Feyen et al (2021), UNCTAD (2023), Prasad (2023)).
16 See IMF (2021).
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 15
First, stablecoins could pose severe risks to the integrity of the financial system, including for
AML/CFT. While this risk is present in all countries, resource constraints in emerging market and
developing economies (EMDEs) may make it more difficult for authorities to keep pace and adjust their
surveillance, regulatory and supervisory frameworks.
Second, stablecoins pegged to foreign currencies would fluctuate in value against local currencies
in EMDEs. If used for debt contracts, this would be a de facto new form of foreign exchange (FX) lending,
which has been at the heart of many financial crises in EMDEs.
Third, stablecoins could import the monetary policies of the fiat currencies in the basket, which
may not be optimal for most EMDEs and could thus impinge on their monetary autonomy (IMF (2023a)).
Countries with large cross-border inflows in stablecoins may face difficulties in maintaining international
reserves in hard fiat currencies. This has implications for the functioning of FX and interbank markets,
which are shallower in EMDEs. Liquidity and redemption shocks may thus create disruptive spillovers.
Fourth, and related to the points above, the risks of cryptoisation outlined in the previous section
are particularly acute for EMDEs. Stablecoins can facilitate currency substitution and the evasion of
measures that EMDEs may use to defend their currencies during periods of elevated FX volatility.
Fifth, given reach, scale, network and “winner takes all” effects, EMDEs might end up as a “host”
to entities in a stablecoin system that provide critical services such as governance and reserve asset
management, which may be headquartered elsewhere. This could create a misalignment of incentives
between “home” and “host” supervisors, impeding a holistic oversight. As such, EMDE authorities may lack
control over the broader stablecoin arrangement and its operations that involve residents. When
domestically adopted at scale, this could inhibit risk monitoring and effective oversight of payments to
prevent illicit use and to safeguard financial stability.
3.3 Addressing the risks in crypto
The numerous risks posed by crypto have naturally generated a debate on the optimal policy strategies
for mitigating them. A BIS Bulletin (Aquilina et al (2023)) outlined three non-mutually exclusive lines of
action that could be pursued in the policy toward crypto – namely, a combination of containment,
regulation and bans. The Bulletin contains details of the three approaches, together with specific examples.
Several jurisdictions are already taking various policy actions along the above spectrum. More
concretely, this includes bans, restrictions, clarifications, bespoke requirements and initiatives to facilitate
innovation.17 Most initiatives adopted so far tend to target centrally managed activities (most notably,
issuers of security tokens and stablecoins) and are a function of market developments in each jurisdiction.
Multilateral initiatives in this area, coordinated by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), are already
taking steps to reach consensus on the appropriate regulatory actions. The FSB has already published
a proposed framework for the international regulation of cryptoasset activities (FSB (2022)). This
framework contains two core components. First, it makes recommendations that promote the consistency
and comprehensiveness of regulatory, supervisory and oversight approaches to cryptoasset activities and
markets, and strengthen international cooperation, coordination and information-sharing. Second, it sets
out revised high-level recommendations for the regulation, supervision and oversight of “global
stablecoin” arrangements to address the associated financial stability risks more effectively. The IMF has
also published its view on the core elements of an effective policy framework for addressing the risks
posed by cryptoassets (IMF (2023b)).
17 See FSI (2023) for an overview of the crypto regulatory landscape across 19 jurisdictions.
16 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
More broadly, public authorities could also complement the above lines of action by encouraging
sound innovation within the traditional financial system or through the use of central bank digital
currencies (Aquilina et al (2023)). Improving the quality and reducing the costs of payments would be an
important component of such a strategy. This could be achieved by introducing retail fast payment
systems, such as the Unified Payment Interface (UPI) in India, Pix in Brazil, FedNow in the United States or
initiatives such as the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). Another important component of this broader
strategy would be issuing central bank digital currencies that meet real needs. If properly designed and
implemented, such initiatives could support sound private sector innovation, while reducing the cost of
payments, enhancing financial inclusion and bolstering the integrity of the financial system.
3.4 Addressing data gaps: Project Atlas
Data on crypto activities come from two sources: on-chain data from blockchains and off-chain data
reported by market actors. Data are spread across a vast network of distributed ledgers, exchanges and
other providers. Figures on basic indicators such as market size and crypto usage hence lack transparency,
consistency and reliability (ESRB (2023)).
Data gaps hamper efforts to develop a coherent monitoring framework for crypto at
large.18 These issues stem in large part from (i) the difficulty in aggregating, reconciling and analysing the
data available on distributed ledgers; (ii) the pseudo-anonymity that inhibits the ability to ascertain the
types of cryptoasset investors who may be the beneficiaries of multiple wallets; and (iii) the large number
of off-chain transactions. These data gaps stand in the way of a proper assessment of potential risks.
In response to these data challenges, the BIS Innovation Hub Eurosystem Centre, the Deutsche
Bundesbank and De Nederlandsche Bank have initiated Project Atlas, which will shed light on the
macroeconomic relevance of cryptoasset markets and DeFi. The data will be based on a transparent
methodology and tailored to the needs of public authorities. It will blend reported data gathered from
crypto exchanges and stablecoin issuers with data from public blockchains. By attributing blockchain
transactions to crypto exchanges and their geographic locations, Atlas will be able to derive and visualise
cross-border flows around the globe.
Preliminary data from Project Atlas reveal that, although relatively small in comparison to total
network traffic, flows between centralised crypto exchanges are substantial (Graph 7.A). Attributing
geographic locations to exchanges (where possible) lays out the structure of cross-border flows and
provides a starting point for evaluating the relative economic significance across jurisdictions (Graphs 7.A
and 7.B). This indicates non-negligible – and growing – use of cryptocurrencies for cross-border capital
flows.
Nevertheless, further steps are needed for a holistic assessment of crypto markets. Cooperation
on data collection and monitoring by individual jurisdictions can facilitate the development of appropriate
policy responses. Such cooperation could also help with enforcement actions for illicit activities. Currently
the lack of standards implies that data on crypto are usually limited to what companies report voluntarily
or dependent on companies whose business model is to sell data to market participants. For on-chain
data, the choice of methodologies greatly influences the reported numbers while the exact heuristics and
methodologies are often unclear. Accordingly, data are often reported differently by various analytics
companies and are difficult to compare across time and space.
With respect to DeFi, the FSB (2023) highlights three types of indicators that authorities should
be monitoring to assess vulnerabilities and risks. First, indicators that can help to gauge the overall size
and evolution of the sector. Second, indicators especially designed to assess financial vulnerabilities. And
18 See FSB (2023) and IMF (2023).
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 17
third, indicators that can help gauge the potential for spillovers by tracking and assessing interconnections
between DeFi, CeFi, traditional finance and the real economy.
Bitcoin flows between exchanges1 Graph 7
A. Inter-exchange and total flows1 B. Inflows by continent2
USD bn USD bn USD bn
16 2,000 20
12 1,500
15
8 1,000
10
4 500
5
0 0
0
Africa Asia Europe North Other3
09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 America
Value of inter-exchange bitcoin flows (lhs)
Inflows from: Africa North America
Total value of bitcoin flows (rhs) Asia Other3
Europe
C. Net flows by country4
Outflows bigger than $1bn
Inflows bigger than $1bn
Outflows smaller than $1bn
Inflows smaller than $1bn
1 Inter-exchange flows are a lower bound estimate. The calculation of total flows excludes certain transaction types (eg coinbase transactions),
flows between the same addresses as inputs and outputs in a transaction and transactions between addresses attributed to the same crypto
exchange. 2 Preliminary daily data for the period Jan–Dec 2022, based on the location of exchanges for which flows are identified, not on
users’ location. 3 Latin America and Oceania. 4 The use of this map does not constitute, and should not be construed as constituting, an
expression of a position by the BIS regarding the legal status or sovereignty of any territory or its authorities, the delimitation of international
frontiers and boundaries and/or the name and designation of any territory, city or area. The circles represent Antigua and Barbuda, Hong
Kong SAR, Seychelles and Singapore. Preliminary daily data for the period Jan–Dec 2022, based on the location of exchanges for which flows
are identified, not on users’ location.
Source: BIS Innovation Hub Eurosystem Centre Project Atlas.
18 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
Developing an accurate picture of crypto and DeFi will require a considerable amount of work to
standardise definitions, processes and approaches. Work on these issues is already ongoing in the Data
Gaps Initiative, as welcomed by G20 leaders in November 2022.19
4. Conclusions
In just over a decade, crypto has gone from niche activity to something that impinges on the mainstream
financial system. While initially it was the preserve of a small set of enthusiasts, millions of retail users as
well as more and more institutional investors have entered the crypto ecosystem in recent years.
Crypto offers some elements of genuine innovation, such as programmability and composability.
With these new functionalities, sequences of financial transactions could be automated and seamlessly
integrated. Together with tokenisation, this has the potential to reduce the need for manual interventions
that currently delay transactions and create costs (Carstens (2023), Aldasoro et al (2023)).
That said, crypto has so far failed to harness innovation to the benefit of society. Crypto remains
largely self-referential and does not finance real economic activity. It suffers from inherent shortcomings
related to stability and efficiency, as well as accountability and integrity. These structural flaws result from
the underlying economics of incentives rather than technological limitations. Furthermore, while DeFi and
crypto for the most part replicate services offered by the traditional financial system, they can exacerbate
known vulnerabilities. Taken together, the key takeaways from this report suggest that crypto’s inherent
structural flaws make it unsuitable to play a significant role in the monetary system.
19 See IMF (2022).
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 19
References
Ahmed, R, I Aldasoro and C Duley (2023): “Par for the course: public information and stablecoin runs”,
mimeo.
Aldasoro, I, S Doerr, L Gambacorta, R Garratt and P Koo Wilkens (2023): “The tokenisation continuum”, BIS
Bulletin, no 72, April.
Alvarez, F, D Argente and D Van Patten (2022): “Are cryptocurrencies currencies? Bitcoin as legal tender in
El Salvador”, NBER Working Papers, no 29968.
Aquilina, M, J Frost and A Schrimpf (2023): “Addressing the risks in crypto, laying out the options”, BIS
Bulletin, no 66, January.
Aramonte, S, W Huang and A Schrimpf (2021): “DeFi risks and the decentralisation illusion”, BIS Quarterly
Review, December.
Aramonte, S, S Doerr, W Huang and A Schrimpf (2022): “DeFi lending: intermediation without
information?”, BIS Bulletin, no 57, June.
Arner, D, R Auer and J Frost (2020): “Stablecoins: risks, potential and regulation”, Bank of Spain Financial
Stability Review, November.
Auer, R (2022): “Embedded supervision: how to build regulation into decentralized finance”,
Cryptoeconomic Systems, vol 2, no 1, June.
Auer, R, G Cornelli, S Doerr, J Frost and L Gambacorta (2022): “Crypto trading and Bitcoin prices: evidence
from a new database of retail adoption”, BIS Working Papers, no 1049, November.
Auer, R, M Farag, U Lewrick, L Orazem and M Zoss (2022): “Banking in the shadow of Bitcoin? The
institutional adoption of cryptocurrencies”, BIS Working Papers, no 1013.
Auer, R, J Frost and J Vidal Pastor (2022): ”Miners as intermediaries: extractable value and market
manipulation in crypto and DeFi”, BIS Bulletin, no 58, June.
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) (2018): “Cryptocurrencies: looking beyond the hype”, Annual
Economic Report, June, Chapter V.
——— (2022): “The future monetary system”, Annual Economic Report, June, Chapter III.
——— (2023): “Blueprint for the future monetary system: improving the old, enabling the new”, Annual
Economic Report, June, Chapter III.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) (2022): “Prudential treatment of cryptoasset exposures –
second consultation”, June.
Boissay, F, G Cornelli, S Doerr and J Frost (2022): “Blockchain scalability and the fragmentation of crypto”,
BIS Bulletin, no 56, June.
Budish, E (2022): “The economic limits of bitcoin and anonymous, decentralized trust on the blockchain”,
University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Papers, no 83.
Buterin, V (2016): “Chain interoperability”, R3 Reports.
——— (2021): “Why sharding is great: demystifying the technical properties”,
vitalik.ca/general/2021/04/07/sharding.html.
Carstens, A (2023): “Innovation and the future of the monetary system”, keynote speech at the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, 22 February.
20 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
Catalini, C and A de Gortari (2021): “On the economic design of stablecoins”, mimeo.
Chen, S, S Doerr, J Frost, L Gambacorta and H S Shin (2023): “The fintech gender gap”, Journal of Financial
Intermediation, vol 54.
Cornelli, G, S Doerr, J Frost and L Gambacorta (2023): “Crypto shocks and retail losses”, BIS Bulletin, no 69,
February.
Doerr, S, L Gambacorta, L Guiso and M Sanchez del Villar (2023): “Privacy regulation and fintech lending”,
BIS Working Papers, no 1103.
Duley, C, L Gambacorta, R Garratt and P Koo Wilkens (2023): “The oracle problem and the future of DeFi”,
BIS Bulletin, forthcoming.
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) (2023): “Crypto-assets and decentralised finance. Systemic
implications and policy options”, May.
Feichtinger, R, R Fritsch, Y Volanthen and R Wattehofer (2023): “The hidden shortcomings of (D)AOs – an
empirical study of on-chain governance”, mimeo.
Feyen, E, J Frost, H Natarajan and T Rice (2021): “What does digital money mean for emerging market and
developing economies?”, in R Rau, R Wardrop and L Zingales (eds), The Palgrave Handbook of
Technological Finance, pp 217–41.
Financial Action Task Force (FATF) (2021): Virtual assets and virtual asset service providers, updated guidance
for a risk-based approach, October.
——— (2022): Targeted update on implementation of the FATF standards on virtual assets and virtual asset
service providers, June.
Financial Stability Board (FSB) (2022): “Assessment of risks to financial stability from crypto-assets”,
February.
——— (2023): “The financial stability risks from decentralised finance”, February.
Financial Stability Institute (FSI) (2023): “Crypto, tokens and DeFi: navigating the regulatory landscape”, FSI
Insights on Policy Implementation, forthcoming.
Frost, J, P Wierts and H S Shin (2020): “An early stablecoin? The Bank of Amsterdam and the governance
of money”, BIS Working Papers, no 902, November.
Garratt, R and H S Shin (2023): “Stablecoins versus tokenised deposits: implications for the singleness of
money”, BIS Bulletin, no 73.
Gorton, G and J Zhang (2022): “Taming wildcat stablecoins”, University of Chicago Law Review, vol 90.
Huberman, G, J Leshno and C Moallemi (2021): “Monopoly without a monopolist: An economic analysis of
the bitcoin payment system”, The Review of Economic Studies, vol 88, no 6, pp 3011–40.
International Monetary Fund (IMF) (2021): “The crypto ecosystem and financial stability challenges”, Global
Financial Stability Report, October, Chapter 2.
——— (2022): “G20 Leaders welcome new data gaps initiative to address climate change, inclusion and
financial innovation”, Press Release, no 22/410, November.
——— (2023a): “G20 note on the macrofinancial implications of cryptoassets”, February.
——— (2023b): “Elements of effective policies for crypto assets”, IMF Policy Paper, February.
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) (2022): Decentralized finance report, March.
Nakamoto, S (2008): “Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system”, white paper.
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 21
Neilson, D H (2021): Stablecoins and DeFi: Banking for unattended contracts, Soon Parted, 12 October,
https://www.soonparted.co/p/stablecoins-defi..
Prasad, E (2023): “Managing risks from crypto assets and decentralized finance: an emerging market and
developing economy perspective”, Background Note for G-20 Discussions on Regulation of Crypto Assets,
June.
Schär, F (2021): “Decentralized finance: on blockchain- and smart contract-based financial markets”,
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, vol 103, no 2, April.
Shin, H S (2019): “Big tech in finance: opportunities and risks”, speech at the BIS Annual General Meeting,
June.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (2023): “Note on the macrofinancial
implications of crypto assets for developing countries”, April.
22 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks
Glossary
This glossary sets out a (non-exhaustive) list of terms used in the report. The definitions are based primarily
on previous reports by international organisations and standard-setting bodies.
Asset-backed token: A cryptoasset that represents an interest in a physical asset.
Blockchain: A form of distributed ledger in which details of transactions are held in the ledger in the form
of blocks of information. A block of new information is attached into the chain of pre-existing blocks via a
computerised process by which transactions are validated.
Bridge: A technique used to transfer cryptoassets between ecosystems by, typically, creating a synthetic
representation of a blockchain-specific cryptoasset on a different blockchain.
Centralised exchange (CEX): A cryptoasset trading platform that facilitates the buying and selling of
cryptoassets, either for fiat currencies or for another digital asset. The platform functions as an
intermediary and sometimes provides custody and other services.
Centralised finance (CeFi): Centralised intermediaries (for example lending or trading platforms) within
the crypto ecosystem that purport to offer some of the features of DeFi with some of the ease of use and
security of traditional financial services products.
Composability: the ability to reuse existing software components to build new applications. The crypto
industry refers to composability as akin to Lego blocks. Each block can be combined with another, allowing
developers to build complex structures by combining different blocks.
Consensus mechanism: In DLT applications, the process by which validators agree on the state of a
distributed ledger.
Cryptoasset: A type of private sector digital asset that is expressed primarily through cryptography and
distributed ledger or similar technology.
Cryptoisation: The risk of local currency substitution with cryptoassets, most likely dollar-denominated
stablecoins. This is a particular risk for countries with unstable currencies and weak monetary frameworks.
Decentralised autonomous organization (DAO): In theory, a decentralised application consisting of
rules of operation that dictate who can execute a certain behaviour or make an upgrade. Code helps create
an organisational structure intended to function without a centralised management structure.
Decentralised applications (DApps): DeFi applications offering services such as lending or trading,
predominantly between cryptoassets including stablecoins.
Decentralised exchange (DEX): Marketplaces built using distributed ledger or similar technology where
transactions can occur directly between cryptoasset traders.
Decentralised finance (DeFi): A set of alternative financial markets, products and systems that operate
using cryptoassets and smart contracts (software) built using distributed ledger or similar technology.
DeFi protocol: A specialised system of rules that creates a program designed to perform traditional
financial functions.
Digital asset: A digital instrument that is issued or represented through the use of distributed ledger or
similar technology. This does not include digital representations of fiat currencies. It is also called a coin
or token.
Distributed ledger technology (DLT): A means of saving information through a distributed ledger, ie a
repeated digital copy of data available at multiple locations.
The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks 23
Gas fees: Unit that relates to the amount of computational effort required to execute specific operations
on the Ethereum network. Gas refers to the fee required to conduct a transaction on Ethereum.
Governance tokens: Tokens issued as an incentive, allowing the user the purported opportunity to
become a partial owner and decision-maker in a DeFi protocol.
Mining: One means to create new cryptoassets, often through a mathematical process by which
transactions are verified and added to the distributed ledger.
Native token: The base token of a blockchain which plays an integral part in the operation of the protocol
it is issued on and that is created at the blockchain’s genesis. It is usually used to pay transaction fees.
Oracle: A service that enables smart contracts to access, in real time, relevant external or off-chain data by
means of queries typically through crypto exchange application programming interfaces and which
provides inputs to smart contracts.
Order book exchange: A type of decentralised exchange (DEX) that uses smart contracts for transaction
settlement and order books, which are usually held off-chain by a third party, for registration of buy and
sell orders.
Proof of stake: A blockchain-specific consensus mechanism for validating entries into a distributed
database and keeping the database secure based on validators’ pledging or “staking” a certain amount of
cryptoassets in order to have a chance to be chosen for the creation of a new block.
Proof of work: A blockchain-specific consensus mechanism for validating entries into a distributed
database and keeping the database secure where potential validators compete with one another to solve
cryptographic puzzles in order to be allowed to add transactions to the distributed ledger.
Pseudonymous data: Data that cannot be attributed to a specific individual, without the use of additional
information.
Rug pull: A cryptoasset market scam in which a development team attracts investors into a project before
disappearing with investor funds, leaving investors with a valueless asset.
Side-chain: A type of off-chain scaling solution that helps overcome capacity restrictions inherent to
traditional blockchain networks by leveraging a separate and independently run blockchain network that
is connected to the original one by a two-way bridge.
Smart contract: A cryptoasset term that refers to self-executing applications that can trigger an action if
some pre-specified conditions are met.
Stablecoin: A cryptoasset that aims to maintain a stable value relative to a specified asset, or a pool or
basket of assets.
Staking: Is the process of locking up cryptoassets for a set period of time to help support the operation
of a blockchain in return for a share of transaction fees.
Tokenisation: The process of creating a digital representation (token) of an asset and putting it on a
programmable ledger. The information stored in tokenised form can include asset type, ownership details,
valuation, legal framework, optionality and settlement requirements
Total value locked: Industry-reported measure of the total value of assets deposited in a DeFi protocol.
Validator: An individual or entity responsible for verifying transactions on a blockchain.
Wallet: An application or device for storing the private keys providing access to the cryptoasset. Hosted
wallets are typically held by a third-party provider, unhosted wallets by the user.
Wallet provider: A firm that offers storage services to investors in cryptoassets. These may be connected
online (“hot” storage) or kept offline (“cold” storage).
24 The crypto ecosystem: key elements and risks

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/3-BasicAspectsofCryptocu-done.pdf
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/292586903
Basic Aspects of Cryptocurrencies
Article · January 2014
CITATIONS READS
49 48,114
1 author:
Martin Vejačka
Technical University of Košice
46 PUBLICATIONS 319 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Martin Vejačka on 01 February 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
SCI
Journal of Economy, Business and Financing
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
Basic Aspects of Cryptocurrencies
Martin Vejačka
Department of Applied Mathematics and Business Informatics
Technical University of Košice
Košice, Slovakia
martin.vejacka@tuke.sk
Abstract—Cryptocurrency is specific type of virtual currency based on principles of cryptography and electronic communication. In
recent years emerged dozens of cryptocurrencies, while the most popular is the first ever introduced - Bitcoin. Cryptocurrencies
attracted in recent years lots of attention. Character of cryptocurrencies and their volatility is discussed widely by general public,
policymakers and economists. In this paper, basic aspects of cryptocurrencies are briefly introduced. Volatility of two major
cryptocurrencies - Bitcoin and Litecoin is investigated. Further it is compared with volatilities of main stock indices, commodities and
money pair of euro to US dollar in recent years. Other basic aspects of cryptocurrencies including anonymity, awareness and legislation
effects are briefly investigated and discussed. The research results show extremely high volatility of cryptocurrencies in comparison to
basic investment instruments. Also multiple legislation barriers for use of cryptocurrencies are detected. Research findings suggest that
recent negative awareness of cryptocurrencies might lead to change of the cryptocurrencies’ role. Cryptocurrencies might end up as
exchange medium in black economy or as a speculation tool for a limited number of speculators daring to trade highly volatile
cryptocurrencies for standard fiat currencies.
Keywords-cryptocurrency; virtual currency; volatility; Bitcoin; Litecoin;
damaged or the wallet file is inadvertently deleted, then the
I. INTRODUCTION wallet file is lost and the bitcoins it contained are lost forever
Cryptocurrencies are a new concept in the global economy. (in case that the wallet file was not backed up). Although the
They exist only for approximately five years and they already public address of wallet still exists, it can only be accessed by
attracted a lot of attention. Especially, since the year 2013 they the private key, which was deleted. Unless one breaks the very
experience turbulent changes in their exchange rates. The secure encryption built into the system, then it would not be
cryptocurrencies belong to the group of virtual currencies. We possible to recover the lost coins and breaking encryption used
can consider cryptocurrency as a digital medium of exchange, by Bitcoin network by a force is virtually impossible in timely
based on principles of cryptography allowing performance of manner [3].
secure, decentralized and distributed economic transactions [1].
The mining is process of new Bitcoins creation and it is
Theoretical foundations of cryptocurrencies were outlined performed by miners. Miners are second group of Bitcoin users
by Chaum [2] for the first time in 1983 already. The and they are solving artificial mathematical problem by
cryptocurrencies integrate electronic virtual money with dedicating their computational power to the Bitcoin network.
principles of cryptography [2]. The basic principle of The mining is used to confirm waiting transactions by
cryptocurrency is that no individual (or organization) may including them in the block chain. The block chain is created
accelerate or significantly abuse the production of a given every 10 minutes in the case of Bitcoin. So every payment in
currency. Typically only a certain predefined amount of Bitcoins is confirmed in time of 10 minutes. It enforces a
cryptocurrency is collectively produced by the entire chronological order in the block chain, protects the neutrality
cryptocurrency system. The rate of production is set by a value of the network, and allows different computers to agree on the
defined in prior and is publicly known [3]. The state of the system. For the transactions to be confirmed, they
cryptocurrencies allows virtually costless transfers of must be packed in a block that fits very strict cryptographic
cryptocurrency units (referred as coins) between client rules that will be verified by the network. These rules prevent
applications via computer peer-to-peer network [2]. previous blocks from being modified because doing so would
invalidate all following blocks. Mining also represents some
The most famous cryptocurrency and the first to be
kind of a competitive lottery that prevents any individual from
introduced was Bitcoin in 2009. It was designed by a person or
easily adding new blocks consecutively in the block chain. So
a group of persons hiding under pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto
no individuals can control what is included in the block chain
[4]. Two types of Bitcoin users exist: ordinary users and so
or replace parts of the block chain to roll back their own
called Bitcoin miners. Ordinary users of Bitcoin use digital
payments. The creation of block is proof of work system of
wallet similar to electronic banking applications. The wallet is
mining, so the data are costly and time consuming to create in
software for a management of Bitcoin cash, thus for sending
accord with requirements [3]. Bitcoin uses SHA2-256
and receiving payments in bitcoins. Bitcoins exist only as
cryptographic algorithm as a proof of work mechanism during
information in files in a computer or a mobile device. Access to
transactions confirmation [3]. Some cryptocurrencies (e.g.
these files is restricted to the holder of private key, which is
Peercoin) employ also a proof of stake mechanism. The proof
used to secure the money. If file system in the computer is
of stake mechanism means that fractions of cryptocurrency
- 75 - - Economy -
3
SCI
Issn:1339-3723, volume 2, issue 2, 2014
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
units are assigned to their holders as a reward for holding the artificially inflating the price of cryptocurrency through false
cryptocurrency, what can be considered an analogy of interest. positive statements, in order to sell the purchased
cryptocurrency at a higher price than it was bought. Once the
Since the introduction of Bitcoin tens of other
operators of the scheme sell out the cryptocurrency, the price
cryptocurrencies emerged. The most are based on the similar
falls and other holders of given cryptocurrency lose their
specifications as the Bitcoin, which represents first fully
money [12].
implemented cryptocurrency protocol. The second most
popular cryptocurrency Litecoin uses scrypt algorithm as a Morris indicated that some cryptocurrencies might be
proof-of-work and has faster transaction confirmations (2.5 manipulated also by pre-mining. In that case a currency is
minutes) [5]. Most cryptocurrencies gradually introduce new mined or generated by its founders before mining code is
units of currency until reaching a preset maximum cap of the released to the general public. This might be a part of a
total amount of currency that will ever be created. The cryptocurrency's original design. Similarly some
maximum cap of cryptocurrency aims to assure the scarcity, cryptocurrencies might have hidden launches available to only
similar to the case of precious metals. It also should prevent a few individuals and might have extremely high rewards for the
hyperinflation [6]. On the contrary, some cryptocurrencies first miners [13].
might experience hyperdeflation as the amount of the currency
Generally only Bitcoin and Litecoin are directly
in circulation will approach its preset finite cap [7].
interchangeable at markets (like BitStamp, Vircurex, BTC-e,
All currently existing cryptocurrencies are pseudonymous, BTC China and others) for fiat currencies. Other
so they provide very high degree of anonymity. Therefor cryptocurrencies can only be traded for other cryptocurrencies.
cryptocurrencies are less prone to be confiscated by law Banking institutions generally do not accept cryptocurrencies
enforcement institutions [7]. These facts make cryptocurrencies and do not offer services for them. Multiple banks also refuse
very attractive for black market. The case of the Silk Road is to offer services to companies dealing with cryptocurrencies
infamous. It was e-marketplace used for drug dealing (and [13].
other black market trading) and it was accepting payments in
Virtual currencies are based on solving mathematical
cryptocurrencies [9].
problems which require enormous computing power.
However since introduction of cryptocurrencies, they Unfortunately, because of these built-in security mechanisms,
continually gain attention (positive or negative) from the media the processing power used comes to nothing, rather than be
and public, especially during the fast price rise of Bitcoin and used for something meaningful. Now researchers from
Litecoin during the year of 2013. Microsoft Research, Cornell Tech and the University of
Maryland proposed how these computing resources used for
cryptocurrency mining (or rather storing) can be used more
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
useful. They proposed new virtual currency named Permacoin
The theoretical and empirical research of cryptocurrencies
[14].
lacks the bigger extent, because the topic of cryptocurrencies is
very recent and newly arisen. It lacks longer time data series Permacoins would be generated when users would archive
for analysis, because the organized exchange of the data from the huge data fund. The researchers suggest, for
cryptocurrencies and fiat money started only in 2010. example, backing up data from the Library of Congress (200
TB of data). Mining of permacoins would therefore be less
Chaum [2] laid the theoretical foundations of
dependent on computing power and the more storage space.
cryptocurrencies, when he drafted use of cryptology for
The data would be stored locally. The availability and
allowance of untraceable electronic payments. Above
consistency of stored data would be controlled by a network
mentioned pseudonymous Nakamoto [4] proposed the creation
and the user would obtain corresponding permacoins. Safety
of Bitcoin at the end of 2008 and further developed it, what led
features should also check that the data are not stored in the
into introduction of a Bitcoin network in early 2009.
cloud repository and are not vulnerable to attacks on
Researchers, such as Moore and Christin, mainly Permacoin network. It is therefore a public archive data that
investigated security of cryptocurrency accounts. Their results could be useful for mankind. Investments in hardware and
indicated a high risk of breaching security of popular storage would actually serve to secure and distribute data in a
cryptocurrency exchanges. Later crash of Mt.Gox market place decentralized system widely available with multiple data
confirmed their conclusions [10]. backups [14].
The level of cryptocurrencies’ acceptance was investigated Regulators in several countries have warned against use of
by Luther [10]. He concluded that cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin cryptocurrencies. Some countries have taken specific
are unlikely to generate widespread acceptance in the regulatory arrangements to dissuade potential users of
conditions of significant monetary stability and absence of a cryptocurrency. Legal ways of acquiring the amount paid in
government support. cryptocurrencies back, when some problem arises, do not exist,
however administrations try to find solution for consumer’s
Tucker points out a high volatility of cryptocurrencies [12]. protection while using cryptocurrencies [7]. The most
He indicates that holding cryptocurrencies is very risky due to authorities address mainly Bitcoin as prevalent representative
their very high volatility and high potential for price of cryptocurrencies. The willingness to accept it varies in
manipulations. The cryptocurrencies might be manipulated in different countries. For example Chinese central bank forbid to
pump and dump scheme, what is a form of fraud that involves financial institutions in country to offer services connected to
- 76 - - Economy -
3
SCI
Journal of Economy, Business and Financing
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
Bitcoin. Internal Revenue Service (government tax control or manipulate cryptocurrencies protocol because they
administration authority) in USA issued guidance for treating are cryptographically secured [3].
virtual currencies such as Bitcoin as property rather than
Cryptocurrency payments can be made without personal
currency for federal tax purposes. It may help Bitcoin
information linked to the transaction. This offers strong
investors, even though it means Bitcoin users In USA will need
protection against identity theft and almost full anonymity.
to report their transactions [14]. In many other countries
Cryptocurrency users can also protect their money by
Bitcoin and virtual currency in general have also problems with
encryption and backing up their wallets. In addition, it is
acceptation. Authorities in Norway stated that it does not fulfill
impossible for merchants to hide any charges as can happen
requirements of being a currency. In Finland Bitcoin is not
with other payment methods. The cryptocurrency transactions
considered legal currency, because it is by definition in conflict
are secure, irreversible. This protects merchants from losses
with local legislation. It states that payment instrument must
caused by fraud or fraudulent chargebacks. This allows
have the issuer responsible for its actions. On the other hand,
merchants to have lower fees, enlarge markets and decrease
buying cryptocurrencies is in Finland considered a purchase of
administrative costs [3].
goods [7].
On the other hand total value of cryptocurrencies in
Besides the authorities also economists criticize Bitcoin and
circulation and the number of businesses accepting them are
other cryptocurrencies. Laureate of Nobel Prize for Economy
very small compared to classic fiat currencies. Therefore,
Paul Krugman in 2013 stated that Bitcoin is very good medium
relatively small number of trades or events can significantly
of exchange, but it does not store the value at reasonably stable
affect the price of cryptocurrencies. This volatility might
level [16]. Gold preserves value, because if fiat currencies fail,
decrease as cryptocurrency markets and technologies will
gold still can be used as currency as it was used in past. Gold’s
mature [3].
value is limited from above by technology of its mining and its
limited supply in mining sites. Federal Reserve System The most of cryptocurrencies and their software are still in
guarantees (in some limits like inflation etc.) the value of US development with many incomplete features. New tools,
dollar. On the contrary, nobody guarantees minimal value of features, and services might still being developed. In addition,
cryptocurrencies as long as they are decentralized and fully many people are still unaware of cryptocurrencies. Both users
independent. They are mainly limited in preset amount of and businesses accept cryptocurrencies because they want to
cryptocurrency units ever be created [16]. utilize its advantages, but their numbers remains small and still
needs to grow in order to benefit from network effects [3].
The identification and summary of cryptocurrencies’
aspects and empirical investigation of cryptocurrency volatility While total supply of cryptocurrency is predetermined and
are not present in current research. Therefore we decided to gradually increases over time with mining, total demand after it
aim our paper in this area. may vary dramatically. However, the supply of cryptocurrency
on an e-market is not equal to its total supply. It only reflects
III. BASIC ASPECTS OF CRYPTOCURRENCIES the amounts of cryptocurrency that market subjects are willing
to sell at given prices at given moment via e-markets.
Aim of our research was to investigate basic aspects of
cryptocurrencies that might influence their prices. Price of Prices in official currencies are directly set by demand and
cryptocurrency reflects the trust of users in given currency and supply on e-markets only for two the most popular
its future development. cryptocurrencies: Bitcoin and Litecoin. Other cryptocurrencies
are directly interchangeable on e-markets only for Bitcoin or
Cryptocurrencies bring to their users freedom of payments.
Litecoin respectively. Therefore their exchange rate is strongly
They provide the possibility to send and receive any amount of
influenced also by changes of Bitcoin or Litecoin exchange
money quickly anywhere in the world at any time. Users of
rates.
cryptocurrencies are not limited spatially or in time when
realizing their payments, so their users are in full control of Other major aspects that have influence on exchange rate of
their money. cryptocurrency are its acceptance and usability in various
applications. Once again Bitcoin is the most widely accepted
Cryptocurrency payments are processed with no fees or
cryptocurrency in many cases on the web and also brick-and-
extremely small fees. In the case of Bitcoin, users may include
mortar businesses and merchants.
fees with transactions to receive priority processing, which
results in faster confirmation of transactions by the network. Many legal official sites accept payments or donations in
Additionally, merchant processors exist to assist merchants in Bitcoins (or Litecoins). However in addition to that also many
processing transactions, converting bitcoins to fiat currency sites merchandising unofficial or even illegal goods (drugs,
and depositing funds directly into merchants' bank accounts firearms etc.) accept it too. The main reasons are easy transfers
daily. These services are based on Bitcoin, so they can be and their almost complete anonymity of cryptocurrency
offered for much lower fees than with PayPal or credit card transactions. Logically subjects acting on black market want to
networks [3]. remain anonymous.
All information concerning the cryptocurrency money Also availability of cryptocurrency is important issue. The
supply is readable and available in the block chain for anybody easiness of purchasing or exchanging for classical currency
to verify and use in real-time, so cryptocurrencies are into cryptocurrency and vice versa allows better possibilities to
transparent. Furthermore no individual or organization can use cryptocurrencies. Consequently it influences their
- 77 - - Economy -
3
SCI
Issn:1339-3723, volume 2, issue 2, 2014
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
exchange rates. In case of Bitcoin, there are already ATMs for
Bitcoin purchases available in some countries, which use
exchange rate from one of major e-markets allowing
cryptocurrency exchange with small fee covering the ATMs
costs of maintenance and operation. This increases availability
of Bitcoin between wide populations. Though the main source
of cryptocurrency remain mining and direct trading on
electronic markets.
Furthermore legislation changes in many countries
influence positively or negatively the possibility of using
cryptocurrency in legal money transactions. In some countries
legislative arrangements induced by possible illegal
cryptocurrency transactions brought restrictions to the use of Figure 1. Bitcoin historical price chart
cryptocurrencies in particular country. However, the influence
of this legislation on illegal transactions would be lower, Source: own processing based on [19], [20], [21]
because they already are out of law system of given country
from another reason than new legislation restricting Basic aim of this paper is to investigate volatility of
cryptocurrency usage. cryptocurrencies and their comparison with volatilities of main
currencies, indices and commodities on global markets. Results
Awareness about cryptocurrency affects both positively or might suggest if cryptocurrency are suitable investment for
negatively its exchange rate. Higher awareness of Bitcoin made anyone. Two the most popular cryptocurrencies Bitcoin and
it very popular in last year what partially contributed to Litecoin were selected, because of their direct
enormous increase of its price in 2013. This also had effect on interchangeability to fiat currencies at multiple electronic
many other cryptocurrencies, mainly because they are markets.
interchangeable with Bitcoin.
The figure 1 shows Bitcoin average historical prices on the
All these aspects influence the use of cryptocurrency and its biggest Bitcoin e-markets. All available daily closing prices
final exchange rate to normal currencies. Together they data from multiple electronic markets (Bitstamp, BTC-E, Mt.
generate trust in given cryptocurrency. The higher trust brings Gox) were used to create figure 1. Data showed here start in the
more stable and higher price of cryptocurrency at market. We July 2010 when trading with Bitcoin started on Mt. Gox e-
can summarize these aspects of cryptocurrencies into following market. Data from Mt. Gox were used only in early years
basic aspects: before other markets emerged to avoid the period before crash
of Mt. Gox (in February 2014) when prices on this market were
A. Volatility significantly below prices on other markets. This happened
Volatility represents measure of intensity of price changes because of generally known problems of Mt. Gox with
of given investment. High volatility might cause serious withdrawals of Bitcoins and users were afraid to use this e-
problems with given investment. market any further.
While considering cryptocurrency, the main problem The figure 1 clearly shows that the main big price changes
caused by the volatility is that of a deflationary bias. With more of Bitcoin occured in 2013. Two price peaks were recorded in
and more people wanting access to a limited number of 2013. First peak was during April 2013, when Bitcoin price
cryptocurrency, its value will be pushed upwards and things peaked at above 200 USD per Bitcoin (USD/BTC) and second
therefore become cheaper for those that have cryptocurrency in in December 2013 at around 1200 USD/BTC. The biggest
possession. Deflation encourages cash hoarding rather than difference between prices within one year was in 2013 with
spending and it is incorporated directly into the basic principles lowest price at 13.31 and highest at 1209.94. It represents
of current cryptocurrencies. High increases in cryptocurrency ninetyfold increase of price within period of one year. It
values encourage its users to hold cryptocurrency further and illustrates tremendous fluctuations of Bitcoin prices in
avoid its use for [17]. For example O’Brien at this point relatively short periods.
suggests that cryptocurrency ceases to be a currency and
Second chart (see figure 2) shows second Bitcoin rally in
becomes a virtual commodity [18].
2013. The data illustrated on figure 2 are from October 2013
On the other hand, big decreases of cryptocurrency’s value until May 2014. It is more obvious that highest price was
encourage its holders to sell out their cryptocurrency and buy overdeveloped and it decreased to its half during one month.
more stable traditional currencies or commodities. This leads to Later decrease in February of 2014 is caused by crash of
even greater decreases of cryptocurrency rates as long as their former biggest Bitcoin e market Mt. Gox, which significantly
sell out increases supply of cryptocurrency on the market and undermined the trust in cryptocurrencies in general population.
sellers tend to sell cryptocurrency at still lower and lower price. Since then has the Bitcoin price decreasing trend.
In case of traditional currencies central banks exist to avoid
these effects and assure currency stability, while
cryptocurrencies lack any form of central banking.
- 78 - - Economy -
3
SCI
Journal of Economy, Business and Financing
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
Figure 2. Bitcoin historical price chart – period since October 2013
Source: own processing based on [19], [20], [21] Figure 4. Bitcoin and Litecoin prices comparison since August 2013
Source: own processing based on [19], [20], [21], [22]
From these rate changes of two major cryptocurrencies is
already obvious, that cryptocurrencies have high volatility. In
order to express their volatilities more accurately, we have
gathered available data on Bitcoin and Litecoin prices on
electronic markets (graphically presented on above). Further
percentage prices change between two following trading days
was calculated. As measure of volatility then was used standard
deviation of all percentage price changes available. Finally 30-
day and annualized volatility were calculated by adjustment
with square root rule.
With aim to provide better view of cryptocurrencies’
volatilities we further compared them with volatility of stocks,
Figure 3. Litecoin historical price chart on BTC-e e-market
commodities and currencies. Data on major indices (Dow
Jones Industrial Average, S&P 500 and NASDAQ) were
Source: own processing based on [22]
gathered at given markets and their volatilities were calculated
The similar case in some areas is the one of the Litecoi n. using the same method as in the case of Bitcoin and Litecoin.
The figure 3 shows historic prices of Litecoin at BTC-e
For further comparison also volatilities of main
electronic market since august 2013 until May of 2014. Data
commodities were calculated. Gold, silver and crude oil prices
on Litecoin prices before this period are not available, because
from main commodity markets were gathered and processed
of non-existent Litecoin market at time prior to this period. It
with the same methods as cryptocurrencies and indices.
illustrates shorter period than figure 1, but it is obvious that
Litecoin had very volatile period during November and For allowance of comparison with common fiat currencies
December of 2013, increasing its rate from 4 USD/LTC to we considered in our analysis also major currency pair
above 41 USD /LTC during one month. EUR/USD on foreign exchange markets with same method of
volatility calculation.
On the contrary, in comparison with the Bitcoin’s price
decrease since February of 2014, Litecoin’s price is rising in All data were gathered from the same period of time
that period. Litecoin’s price rising trend is probably caused by (between July 2010 and May 2014), only for Litecoin had to be
partial switch of cryptocurrency investors and users from used shorter period, because e-markets started to allow change
Bitcoin to Litecoin since Mt. Gox crash. of Litecoin for a standard currency later than in the case of
Bitcoin.
The figure 4 even better illustrates Bitcoin and Litecoin
prices’ changes in the most volatile period since August 2013, Following table I shows us comparison of all calculated
with use of adjusted secondary (Litecoin) axis to show both volatilities of cryptocurrencies, indices, commodities and
cryptocurrencies on a joint basis. Litecoin prices have similar currency pair.
development as Bitcoin prices with even higher peaks and
lower bottoms. This suggests that Litecoin might have higher Besides previous volatility expression based on standard
volatility than Bitcoin. deviation of all percentage change, we decided to further
compare volatility expressed by measure of Average True
Litecoin stopped to copy Bitcoin’s course of prices in after Range (ATR).
above mentioned Mt. Gox crash in February of 2014, when
Litecoin continued to rise while Bitcoin lost almost half of its The Average True Range is an indicator that measures
original price. volatility and was developed by J. Welles Wilder [30]. It was
designed considering commodities and daily prices.
- 79 - - Economy -
3
SCI
Issn:1339-3723, volume 2, issue 2, 2014
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
the maximum gap of all three possible gap options. Further
Average True Range was counted as moving exponential
TABLE II. VOLATILITY COMPARISON – STANDARD DEVIATION
METHOD average according following formula:
Volatility 30-Day Annualized ATR  n1 TR
Daily Volatility
Comparison Volatility Volatility ATR  t1 t
t n
Bitcoin 7,56% 41,43% 120,09%
Litecoin 9,52% 52,15% 151,13% where n is period of moving average, TR is true range in
given day (t) [30].
DJIA 0,92% 5,28% 14,86%
In our calculation, we used the most common 14–day
S&P500 1,05% 5,69% 16,37%
period and expressed ATR for the whole period of time
NASDAQ 1,16% 6,31% 18,17% (between July 2010 and May 2014). ATR was initialized (at t =
0) with a 14-day trailing average of TR. We have expressed
Gold 0,78% 4,21% 12,19%
Average True Range percentage as ratio of current ATR to
Silver 1,57% 8,49% 24,38% closing price in given day, to allow comparison of volatility
between differently priced currencies, indices or commodities.
EUR/USD 0,46% 2,51% 7,27%
To provide comparison for whole period of our gathered data
WTI Crude Oil 1,70% 9,25% 26,72% we expressed a mean of all acquired daily ATRs. The table II
shows our results:
a. Own processing based on data from [19],[22],[23],[24][25],[26],[27],[28],[29]
Commodities are often subject to gaps and limit moves, which
TABLE II. VOLATILITY COMPARISON AVERAGE TRUE RANGE METHOD
occur when a commodity opens up or down its maximum
allowed move for the session. A volatility formula based only Highest ATR Mean ATR
Volatility Comparison
on the high-low range would fail to capture volatility from gap percentage percentage
or limit moves. Wilder created Average True Range to capture Bitcoin 50,15% 9,41%
this “missing” volatility. ATR does not provide an indication of
Litecoin 38,15% 11,47%
price direction only measures volatility [30].
DJIA 6,51% 1,43%
Average True Range is based on concept called True Range
(TR), which is defined as the greatest of the following options: S&P500 4,34% 1,51%
1 current high price less the current low price in NASDAQ 3,83% 1,40%
given period
Gold 1,38% 0,50%
2 current high price less the previous period close Silver 3,51% 0,98%
price (absolute value)
EUR/USD 4,16% 0,33%
3 current low price less the previous close price
WTI Crude Oil 2,57% 1,24%
(absolute value)
a. Own processing based on data from [19],[22],[23],[24][25],[26],[27],[28],[29]
Absolute values are used to ensure positive numbers to
measure the distance between two points, but not the direction, Table II contains also single highest ATR percentage
i.e. not increase or decrease of price just size of the price recorded during investigated time period. It documents single
change. If the current period's high is above the prior period's most extreme movements in prices although smoothed by 14-
high and the low is below the prior period's low, then the day moving exponential average. Both cryptocurrencies have
current period's high-low range will be used as the True Range extreme highest ATR percentage. Our main indicator of ATR
(i.e. first option). Options 2 and 3 are used when there is a gap volatility in this method is a mean ATR percentage during
or an inside day. A gap occurs when the previous close is investigated time period. There again both Bitcoin and Litecoin
greater than the current high (signaling a potential gap down or recorded multiple-times higher values of volatility than other
limit move) or the previous close is lower than the current low investigated objects. These results correlate with results of
(signaling a potential gap up or limit move) [30]. volatility comparison based on standard deviation. Relative
stability of gold prices confirms its reputation of safe harbor for
As long as True Range uses absolute price changes, also investors. Stock indices are slightly more volatile than
ATR reflects volatility as absolute level. In other words, ATR commodities. However given two cryptocurrencies have
is not shown as a percentage of the current close. This means dramatically higher volatility confirmed by this method too.
low priced stocks will have lower ATR values than high price
stocks. Because of this, ATR values are not comparable. Even Our results confirm that cryptocurrencies have currently
large price movements for a single security, can make long- extremely high volatility in comparison to main major
term ATR comparisons impractical [30]. currencies, stock indices and commodities. Volatility of
Bitcoin was approximately eightfold higher than other
To overcome this problem, in our volatility comparison instruments investigated. Litecoin had even higher volatility
based on ATR we have decided to express ATR percentage. than Bitcoin. Other cryptocurrencies were not investigated as
Firstly, True Range of all periods was counted with selecting long as they are interchangeable only for Bitcoin or Litecoin
- 80 - - Economy -
3
SCI
Journal of Economy, Business and Financing
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
and they copy price course of two main cryptocurrencies. Also Gox customer care did not identify the payment with original
their significance and market capitalization is way lower. identification and sent given amount again, even if such
amount already has been sent there but it has only changed
However, the high volatility is not for cryptocurrencies
identification. This scheme could be repeated multiple times.
users only the bad news. Even short-term speculations might
This wrong procedure led to multiple losses of amount in
bring high earnings to cryptocurrency speculators. This fact
standard currencies and it could be prevented by early change
along with high growth of cryptocurrencies exchange rates
of procedures on this e-market [32].
attracted even more speculators. It led to even bigger price
growths and creation of price bubbles. Although users holding
C. Availability
cryptocurrencies, who purchased (or mined) it sooner in past
before volatile year of 2013 might have recorded above 1000 Another important aspect of cryptocurrencies is their
percent earnings. availability for use. Availability is influenced by easiness of
purchasing and their interchangeability for official standard
Having a volatile currency means that businesses can’t plan
currencies. This is enabled by private electronic markets
or budget effectively, and the chaos that this could cause would
available to general public.
be too much of a risk for most, even if sometimes they came
out ahead. Nobody knows how much stuff a bitcoin will be Number of subjects accepting payments in given
able to buy in a day, a week, or a month – there are no cryptocurrency reflects also its availability and usability.
fundamentals to speak of. Number of merchants accepting some cryptocurrency (Bitcoin
mainly) is increasing, but they are facing the problem of high
High demand after cryptocurrencies made them very
volatility of cryptocurrencies, so at most cases they do not keep
volatile with predominant growth of exchange rate. These
cryptocurrency for the longer period of time and change for
effects are transferred from Bitcoin and Litecoin into other
standard currency. On the other hand, higher availability brings
cryptocurrencies thanks to their interchangeability only via
higher and more stable exchange rate of cryptocurrency thanks
medium of Bitcoin or Litecoin. Recorded extreme volatility of
to increased number of users of given cryptocurrency slowing
cryptocurrencies suggests them only for risk-takers considering
rate changes and decreasing its volatility in time.
them as investment possibility.
Further the speed of transactions and their confirmations
B. Awareness processes makes cryptocurrency more available and practical
for payments in electronic environment.
The awareness of cryptocurrency affects the count of its
users and therefore also the stability of its exchange rate. The
D. Anonymity
higher awareness of given cryptocurrency means its more
potential users. Very big role in the field of awareness play the All cryptocurrency payments between anonymous sides are
media. High media coverage of Bitcoin’s price rally definitely hardly traceable. This fact is the main reason of their usage in
drew attention of numerous additional speculators, who then criminal operations. Very hard transactions traceability and no
invested in Bitcoin and participated on its enormous growth of central guaranty of currency are main reasons of criticism and
price. Besides the all forms of media also the word of mouth legislation restrictions of cryptocurrencies.
increases the awareness of cryptocurrencies and contributes to
Governments and security authorities are also afraid of
increase of cryptocurrency users numbers.
virtually untraceable transactions that might be connected with
On the other hand, negative information on financing criminal activities or terrorist organizations.
cryptocurrencies (electronic wallet thefts, banning by Cryptocurrencies with virtually anonymous transactions are
legislation, criminal usage etc.) might discourage potential potentially very useful for such financial transfers to terrorists
users. from their sponsors. Mainly this lack of transfers’ identification
led to multiple legislation adjustments and arrangements in
The good example of such negative information might be
recent years for cryptocurrency usage restrictions.
above mentioned crash of Mt. Gox - former the biggest Bitcoin
market. It ceased its operations in February of 2014, because of On the other hand, also legal users might prefer anonymous
big losses of Bitcoins and also standard currencies. These transactions due to concerns of privacy intrusions by any third
losses were caused by faulty processes of market, which were party not involved in transaction. After recent cases of
known for longer period, but were not addressed by Mt. Gox disclosure of governmental tracking of private communications
management. Price of Bitcoin on this e-market was influenced are privacy concerns even more understandable.
by this fact in multiple weeks prior to its crash. The Mt. Gox’s
So anonymity of cryptocurrency affects the usage of
crash significantly influenced also prices of Bitcoin at other e-
cryptocurrencies both positively and negatively.
markets due to disruption of trust in Bitcoin [31]. Its prices still
have decreasing trend since then.
E. Legislation influence
Mt. Gox had faulty processes for years and these faults
Before year 2009 not a single national legislation contained
were not adequately addressed by this e-market management.
the term of cryptocurrency. Since then increasing amount of
Fault was in so called transaction malleability. Identification of
money transferred in form of cryptocurrency forced
transaction on Mt. Gox could have been changed during its
policymakers in many countries to issue a recommendation or
processing. Then impostor claimed at Mt. Gox that payment
create laws regarding the use of cryptocurrency in national
with original identification did not ascribe to his wallet. Mt.
- 81 - - Economy -
3
SCI
Issn:1339-3723, volume 2, issue 2, 2014
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
economy. Broader allowance of cryptocurrency usage Perhaps, a more promising is idea of Permacoin that offers
definitely supports its usage and generates bigger trust in it. a glimpse into the future, where digital currency is tied to the
However the most countries did not allowed use of real world and users should provide their computing power and
cryptocurrency or they did not concede to them the status of storage space to create something useful.
currency. This action restrained their possibility of its usage in
legal economy. However in illegal economy it keeps its status
REFERENCES
of safe and anonymous medium of exchange.
[1] A. Greenberg, “Crypto currency”, 2011. [online], Forbes, 20-4-2011,
Any illegal transactions by cryptocurrencies as payments Available at: http://www.forbes.com/forbes/2011/0509/technology-
for illegal commodities and services are affected by valid psilocybin-bitcoins-gavin-andresen-crypto-currency.html .
cryptocurrency legislation only in minor extent as long as these [2] D. Chaum, "Blind signatures for untraceable payments". Advances in
Cryptology Proceedings of Crypto (1983). 82 (3): 199–203.
transactions are already part of activity violating some other
laws with greater criminal consequences. [3] Bitcoin.org, “Frequently asked questions”, 2014 [online], Available at:
https://bitcoin.org/en/faq.
The area of cryptocurrency introduction process rules lacks [4] S.A. Nakamoto, "Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System".
the legislation treatment. Although cryptocurrencies are to be [online], 2009, Bitcoin.org, Available at: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
independent, multiple cases of pre-mining or pump-and-dump [5] I. Miers, C. Garman, M. Green and A.D. Rubin, “Zerocoin: Anonymous
schemes during of introduction of some cryptocurrencies Distributed E-Cash from Bitcoin,” [online], The Johns Hopkins
University Department of Computer Science, Available at:
affected negatively the trust in all cryptocurrencies.
http://spar.isi.jhu.edu/~mgreen/ZerocoinOakland.pdf .
Basically the most legislative arrangements caused [6] J. Matonis, “How Cryptocurrencies Could Upend Banks' Monetary
decreases in cryptocurrency exchange rates because it led to Role,” American Banker, [online], 26-05-2013 , Available at:
http://www.americanbanker.com/bankthink/how-cryptocurrencies-
restrictions in their usage.
could-upend-banks-monetary-role-1057597-
1.html?zkPrintable=1&nopagination=1 .
All of mentioned aspects affect trust in cryptocurrencies
[7] A. Castillo and J. Brito. “BITCOIN A Primer for Policymakers”,
and their usage and rates. The most of factors are associated to
[online], Mercatus Center, George Mason University, Available at:
others, have joint effects and together they made
http://mercatus.org/sites/default/files/Brito_BitcoinPrimer.pdf .
cryptocurrencies attractive for speculations.
[8] J. Surowiecki, “Cryptocurrency,” [online], MIT Technology Review,
26-05-2013, 2013. Available at:
IV. CONCLUSION http://www.technologyreview.com/review/425142/cryptocurrency/
[9] K. Hill, “The FBI's Plan For The Millions Worth Of Bitcoins Seized
Virtual currencies and specifically cryptocurrencies are From Silk Road,” [online], Forbes, 10-04-2013 Available at:
very recent topic object in economy. There are multiple aspects http://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2013/10/04/fbi-silk-road-
of cryptocurrencies and their use in economy. Our research bitcoin-seizure/
indicated and confirmed enormous volatility of [10] T. Moore and N. Christin, “Beware the Middleman: Empirical Analysis
cryptocurrencies exchange rates at levels many-times higher of Bitcoin-Exchange Risk”, 2013. Financial Cryptography and Data
Security Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 7859, pp. 25-33.
than basic indices, commodities and money pair. Their high
[11] W. J. Luther, “Cryptocurrencies, Network Effects, and Switching
volatility causes high risk of trading cryptocurrency and is
Costs”, 2013. working paper, Kenyon College, George Manson
reflected in the formation of price bubbles. However, the great University.
growths of their exchange rates attracted many speculators, but
[12] T. Tucker, "Bitcoin's Volatility Problem: Why Today's Selloff Won't Be
it is obvious that cryptocurrencies can only hardly retain their the Last," [online], Businessweek. 05-12-2013. Available at:
value. This fact can lead to change in understanding of http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-12-05/bitcoins-volatility-
cryptocurrencies as payment medium, but rather as specific problem-why-todays-sell-off-wont-be-the-last.
commodities. In comparison with commodities, [13] D.Z. Morris, "Beyond bitcoin: Inside the cryptocurrency ecosystem,"
[online], 11-01-2014, CNNMoney, Fortune. Available at:
cryptocurrencies have advantage of easy portability thanks to
http://finance.fortune.cnn.com/tag/cryptocurrency/ .
its virtual character, but on the other hand, their virtual
[14] A. Miller et al., “Permacoin: Repurposing Bitcoin Work for Data
character makes them useless or non-existent outside of
Preservation,” [online], University of Maryland, Cornell Tech, Microsoft
electronic environment unlikely other tangible commodities. Research, Available at: http://cs.umd.edu/~amiller/permacoin.pdf
[15] M. Cohn, “IRS’s Virtual Currency Guidance May Benefit Bitcoin
All mentioned aspects generate trust in cryptocurrencies. If
Users,” [online], Accounting Today, Available at:
potential users will trust in cryptocurrencies, they might be
http://www.accountingtoday.com/debits_credits/irs-virtual-currency-
used in increased scale. If trust in cryptocurrencies will not guidance-may-benefit-bitcoin-users-70172-1.html
reach sufficient level, the boom of cryptocurrencies might [16] P. Krugman, “Bitcoin is Evil,” [online], Paul Krugman’s Blog NY
subside. This might be the case of the Bitcoin in last few Times, Available at:
months, when a few marketplace crashes shook its price http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/12/28/bitcoin-is-
evil/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_php=true&_type=blogs&_php=true&_t
significantly. Then cryptocurrencies might become only
ype=blogs&_r=2 .
medium of exchange in black economy or speculation tool of
[17] P. Milnes, “Guide to Crypto-Currencies Part 7 – Solutions to
few speculators still daring to trade cryptocurrencies for
Volatility,” [online], tradersDNA, Available at:
standard currencies. In this case the value of cryptocurrency http://www.tradersdna.com/education/guide-crypto-currencies-part-7-
will be set by demand and supply of it in unofficial economy, solutions-volatility/
where anonymity of transactions is highly valued characteristic [18] M. O’Brien, “Bitcoin Is No Longer a Currency,” [online], the Atlantic,
of cryptocurrency usage. Available at:
http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2013/04/bitcoin-is-no-
longer-a-currency/274859/
- 82 - - Economy -
3
SCI
Journal of Economy, Business and Financing
www.sci-pS PUC uBI bLEINC.AT cTI oIFOINmC
[19] Bitcoincharts.com, “Mt. Gox, Bitcoin historical prices,” [online], [26] World Gold Council, “Gold historical prices.” [online], Available at:
Available at: http://www.gold.org/download/value/stats/statistics/xls/gold_prices.xls.
http://bitcoincharts.com/charts/mtgoxUSD#m1g10zm2g25zv. [27] Macrotrends.net, “Silver historical prices,” [online], Available at:
[20] Bitcoinprice.com, “Bitcoin historical prices” [online], Available at: http://www.macrotrends.net/1333/gold-and-silver-prices-100-year-
http://www.bitcoinprice.com/#USD. historical-chart.
[21] Bitcoincharts.com, “BitStamp, Bitcoin historical prices,” [online], [28] Ycharts.com, “WTI Crude Oil spot historical prices,“ [online], Available
Available at: at: http://ycharts.com/indicators/crude_oil_spot_price.
http://bitcoincharts.com/charts/bitstampUSD#rg60ztgSzm1g10zm2g25z [29] Investing.com, ”Euro to US Dollar historical prices,” [online], Available
v. at: http://www.investing.com/currencies/eur-usd-historical-data.
[22] LTC-charts.com, “Litecoin historical prices,” [online], Available at: [30] W. J. Wilder, ”New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems,” Trend
http://www.ltc-charts.com/period-charts.php?period=2- Research, 1978, 142 p.
days&resolution=hour&pair=ltc-btc&market=btc-e.
[31] J. Hutchinson and R. Liew, “Bitcoin traders hit by Mt.Gox crash”, 2014.
[23] Yahoo Finance, “Dow Jones Industrial Average: historical data,” [online], The Sydney Morning Herald, 11-3-2014, Available at:
[online], Available at: http://finance.yahoo.com/q?s=^DJI. http://www.smh.com.au/business/markets/currencies/bitcoin-traders-hit-
[24] Google Finance, “S&P 500 historical data,” [online], Available at: by-mtgox-crash-20140311-34icp.html#ixzz2xWwbQSPS .
https://www.google.com/finance/historical?q=INDEXSP:.INX. [32] S. Tanase, “The Future of Bitcoin After The Mt. Gox Crash,”[online],
[25] Yahoo Finance, “NASDAQ - historical data,” [online], Available at: 2014, Kaspersky Lab, 10-03-2014 Available at:
http://finance.yahoo.com/q/hp?s=^IXIC+Historical+Prices. http://blog.kaspersky.com/the-future-of-bitcoin-after-the-mt-gox-crash/
- 83 - - Economy -
3
View publication stats

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/1-IF12405.2--done.pdf
Updated January 14, 2025
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrencies (or crypto) are digital assets exchanged recorded by online platforms, such as crypto exchanges,
and recorded on public distributed ledgers (known as which host users’ custodial or hosted wallets. Exchanges
blockchains) that do not require central intermediaries (e.g., allow users to exchange fiat currency into crypto and vice
commercial banks, central banks) for clearing and versa. These platforms allow users to trade digital assets,
settlement. Transactions are public and users are make markets for various assets, and offer other services.
pseudonymous, so, while transactions are visible to all,
users, whose pseudonyms bear no connection to their true Types of Cryptocurrencies
identities, enjoy a level of secrecy. Initially introduced as The two most widely used cryptocurrencies are Bitcoin and
payments tools, cryptocurrencies are mostly used as a form Ether, which, as of January 2025, represent more than 65%
of investment. This In Focus introduces crypto market of the crypto market capitalization. Bitcoin was the first
structure, regulatory frameworks, and policy issues. For cryptocurrency to gain widespread popularity. In Bitcoin,
more information, see CRS Report R47425, decentralized consensus mechanisms encourage some
Cryptocurrency: Selected Policy Issues. network participants (called miners) to secure the system
for financial gain. Bitcoin relies on a proof of work (PoW)
Cryptocurrencies: An Overview consensus mechanism that rewards miners with greater
Once used by a small subset of computer scientists, crypto computational resources and cheaper energy sources.
has gone global. Crypto has experienced continual, rapid
growth and significant price fluctuations. Between 2021 Ether is the cryptocurrency native to the Ethereum
and 2022, after reaching what was then an all-time high of blockchain. Unlike Bitcoin, Ether uses proof of stake (PoS),
around $3 trillion, the market lost two-thirds of its value a less energy-intensive consensus mechanism than PoW. In
and fell to $800 billion. Since then, the market increased PoS, computational effort of PoW is replaced with
steeply again and is currently valued at $3.46 trillion. collateral: Validators lock or “stake” at least 32 Ether to
enter a pool to be given a chance to validate the next block.
Crypto attempts to replace the trust-based traditional The network may seize collateral for malicious activity or
financial system with one that does not require trust. In lieu other offenses. Ethereum also enables smart contracts,
of traditional financial regulatory staples such as chartering, which are applications that self-execute when participants
supervision, and deposit insurance, the cryptocurrency meet some predetermined set of criteria. Because of the
system leverages cryptography and a series of separate but enhanced programmability, Ethereum is widely used for
concurrent incentives for different system participants, such decentralized finance (or DeFi) projects that aim to mimic
as mining and block rewards. traditional finance but without intermediaries.
In recent years, large financial intermediaries—the very Stablecoins
type of institutions crypto developers sought to obviate— Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ether fluctuate in
have displaced the decentralized, trustless ideal. For value based on market supply and demand. By contrast,
example, crypto was originally accessible via less-than- stablecoins are “designed to maintain a stable value relative
user-friendly blockchains, but more user-friendly and to a national currency or other … assets.” For example, the
familiar systems have been created, allowing individuals Tether and USDC stablecoins are set equal in value to $1.
and firms to “custody” their crypto in accounts or “wallets” Total market capitalization for stablecoins is greater than
at institutions. An entire ecosystem has developed that $200 billion. As with cryptocurrencies, stablecoins are not
supports cryptocurrencies, including the custody or hosting generally accepted for retail payments and are primarily
services known as wallets, as well as exchanges, payment used when trading crypto. Stablecoins may attempt to
platforms, decentralized finance platforms, and more. match their value to equivalent fiat currencies in different
ways but have been known to lose their stable values. For
Transacting with Crypto more, see CRS In Focus IF11968, Stablecoins: Background
Users may interact with crypto via on-chain transactions, and Policy Issues.
which are processed over a blockchain, a network of nodes
that maintain the system. Users send and receive Central Bank Digital Currency
cryptocurrency on-chain using unhosted wallets that store The premise of central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) is
the keys that secure ownership of and permit transaction of that issuing and managing a digital currency by a central
crypto. Assets on a blockchain are protected by asymmetric bank may realize at least some of the anticipated benefits of
key cryptography, which encrypts and protects data. cryptocurrencies but with greater efficiency and fewer risks.
For example, CBDCs could be used for payments, much the
Off-chain transactions occur outside of blockchains. way crypto was intended. However, CBDCs would be legal
Instead, they are generally facilitated, processed, and tender and exist as dollars themselves instead of having
https://crsreports.congress.gov
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
values linked to dollars. Currently, there are no plans for a more information, see CRS In Focus IF12320, Crypto and
U.S. CBDC, but other countries have introduced or are in Banking: Policy Issues.
the process of introducing their own. For more, see CRS In
Applicable Money Services Business Framework
Focus IF11471, Central Bank Digital Currencies.
Cryptocurrency exchanges often register as money services
businesses (MSBs) in order to operate. The regulatory
Crypto Regulation
framework for MSBs is largely a state-based licensing
There is no comprehensive regulatory framework for
regime and applies to many nonbank institutions, including
crypto, and regulators have issued few rules specific to
several crypto-related companies, including exchanges and
crypto. In the absence of an overarching framework,
crypto automated teller machines. At the federal level, these
regulators may apply existing regulatory frameworks as
crypto firms are considered MSBs and must register with
circumstances dictate. It is possible that crypto may be
the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network and comply
subject to various existing regulatory frameworks
with the Bank Secrecy Act and implement anti-money
depending in part on regulatory interpretation, the specific
laundering (AML) and know-your-customer (KYC)
crypto product, how it is used, and what it is used for.
programs. For more, see CRS Report R46486, Telegraphs,
Steamships, and Virtual Currency: An Analysis of Money
Applicable SEC Framework
Transmitter Regulation.
Some policymakers believe that “many of the tokens
trading on these [crypto trading] platforms may well meet
Selected Policy Issues
the definition of ‘securities,’” which would require both the
Congress is divided on whether policy should foster, ignore,
tokens and platforms to register with the Securities and
or quarantine the crypto industry, raising some policy
Exchange Commission (SEC) and become subject to SEC
issues. Policymakers generally debate how to cultivate
regulation, absent an exemption. In several cases, the SEC
innovation while minimizing crypto’s potential harms.
has used the Howey test to determine whether
cryptocurrencies qualify as securities. Under that test, an Future of regulation. Traditional financial institutions are
instrument is deemed an “investment contact” (a category subject to an array of regulations, such as prudential
of security) if it involves (1) the investment of money (2) in standards and disclosure requirements. Historically, the
a common enterprise (3) with a reasonable expectation of crypto industry has exhibited non-compliance with and
profits and (4) to be derived from the efforts of others. For uneven enforcement of applicable frameworks. Potential
more, see CRS Report R46208, Digital Assets and SEC future crypto regulation may choose to implement rules that
Regulation. resemble the traditional financial system.
Applicable CFTC Framework The regulatory policy debate has focused on whether a
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) regulatory regime that is tailored for crypto is necessary.
administers the Commodity Exchange Act, which defines Other key policy issues can be summed up in three
commodities as various agricultural products and natural unanswered questions: Are current regulatory authorities
resources—such as gold, oil, wheat, and cotton—as well as sufficient, or is congressional action required? If new
services and rights in which futures may be dealt. In 2015 regulatory authority is required, who should be the primary
the agency brought an enforcement action against a Bitcoin regulator? Is it better to create a new, overarching structure,
options and futures platform, concluding that Bitcoin and or is a refinement of the existing framework sufficient?
other virtual currencies are “commodities.” Various federal
Several bills regarding crypto were introduced in the 118th
court decisions have since supported the CFTC’s position
Congress addressing these issues. They include House-
that the act’s definition of the term commodity encompasses
passed H.R. 4763, the Financial Innovation and Technology
virtual currency. Entities offering trading of crypto futures
for the 21st Century Act, and H.R. 4766, the Clarity for
and options must register with the CFTC, whose authority
Payment Stablecoins Act of 2023.
in spot (cash) markets is limited to enforcing prohibitions
on fraud and manipulation. Privacy vs. illicit activity. The same characteristics that
address a legitimate desire for privacy also provides secrecy
Applicable Banking Framework
that makes it useful for engaging in illicit activity.
Bank involvement with crypto can fall into three categories.
Balancing the potential privacy provided by crypto’s
First, banks can provide traditional banking services, such
pseudonymity with the requirement that financial firms
as lending and deposit taking, to crypto firms. Second,
comply with AML/KYC programs is a key policy issue.
banks can provide crypto services, such as payment
applications and tokenization. Third, crypto firms can seek Energy and the environment. The Bitcoin network’s
to acquire banks or bank charters. Federal bank annual energy consumption has recently been estimated to
involvement in crypto activities faces a two-prong be about 180 terawatt hours, or somewhat more than the
regulatory test. First, an activity must be permissible under amount of energy used by Egypt. For more, see CRS Report
law—Congress has limited banks’ activities related or R45863, Bitcoin, Blockchain, and the Energy Sector.
incidental to the business of banking. Second, an activity
must be safe and sound. Consumer and investor protection. Some argue that
numerous scams and frauds—embodied by the 2022
Crypto firms may seek federal bank charters from the collapse of crypto firm FTX—highlight a lack of investor
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to provide and consumer protections in the industry.
limited crypto services. Various states, including New York
and Wyoming, have established frameworks in which
Paul Tierno, Analyst in Financial Economics
crypto firms may obtain special state banking charters. For
https://crsreports.congress.gov
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
IF12405
Disclaimer
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress.
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.
https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF12405 · VERSION 2 · UPDATED

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/6-composables-support-done.pdf
May 23, 2023
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrencies (or crypto) are digital financial Off-chain transactions are any transactions that occur
instruments exchanged and recorded on public ledgers outside of the main blockchains. Instead, they are generally
(known as blockchains) that do not require central facilitated, processed, and recorded by online platforms,
intermediaries (e.g., commercial banks, central banks) for such as crypto exchanges (e.g., Binance, Coinbase), which
clearing and settlement. Users and transactions are public host users’ custodial or hosted wallets. Exchanges allow
but pseudonymous, which means users’ identities may be users to exchange fiat currency into crypto and vice versa.
obscured. Initially introduced as payments tools, These platforms allow users to trade digital assets, make
cryptocurrencies are mostly used as a form of investment. markets for various assets, and offer other services.
This In Focus introduces crypto market structure, regulatory
frameworks, and policy issues. For more, see CRS Report Types of Cryptocurrencies
R47425, Cryptocurrency: Selected Policy Issues, and CRS The two most widely used cryptocurrencies are Bitcoin and
Report R47064, Blockchain: Novel Provenance Ether, which, as of May 2023, represent more than 60% of
Applications. the crypto market capitalization. Bitcoin was the first
cryptocurrency to gain widespread adoption. Bitcoin
Cryptocurrencies: An Overview functions as a unit of account and medium of exchange. In
Once used by a small subset of computer scientists, crypto Bitcoin, decentralized consensus mechanisms encourage
has gone global. Crypto has been characterized by continual some network participants (called miners) to secure the
and rapid price increases and decreases. Recently, after system for financial gain. Bitcoin relies on a proof of work
experiencing dramatic growth that propelled it to a record (PoW) consensus mechanism that rewards miners who
high of around $3 trillion in November 2021, the market possess greater computational resources and energy
capitalization fell to less than $800 billion in November demands.
2022 in what has been referred to as a “crypto winter.” As
of May 2023, it is valued at around $1.1 trillion. Ether is the cryptocurrency native to the Ethereum
blockchain. Unlike Bitcoin, Ether uses proof of stake (PoS),
Crypto attempts to replace the current financial system, of a less energy-intensive consensus mechanism than PoW. In
which a central tenet is trust, with one that does not require PoS, computational effort of PoW is replaced with
trust. A variety of safeguards are built into traditional collateral: Validators lock or “stake” at least 32 Ether to
banking and payments systems to foster trust, such as enter a pool to be given a chance to validate the next block.
chartering procedures, capital requirements, ongoing The network may seize collateral for malicious activity or
supervision, and deposit insurance. In place of trust, the other offenses. Ethereum also enables smart contracts,
cryptocurrency system leverages a series of separate but which are applications that self-execute when participants
concurrent incentives for different system participants. meet some predetermined set of criteria. Because of the
enhanced programmability, Ethereum is widely used for
In recent years, large financial intermediaries—the very decentralized finance (or DeFi) projects that aim to mimic
type of institutions crypto wanted to make unnecessary— traditional finance but without intermediaries.
have displaced the decentralized, trustless ideal. For
example, crypto was originally accessible via less-than- Stablecoins
user-friendly blockchains, but companies and applications Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ether fluctuate in
created more user-friendly and familiar systems that allow value based on market supply and demand. By contrast,
individuals and firms to “custody” their crypto in accounts stablecoins are digital assets “designed to maintain a stable
or wallets at institutions. An entire ecosystem has value relative to a national currency or other reference
developed that supports cryptocurrencies, including the assets.” For example, the Tether and USD Coin (USDC)
custody or hosting services known as wallets, as well as stablecoins are set equal in value to $1. Total market
exchanges, payment platforms that support crypto, capitalization for stablecoins is greater than $130 billion.
decentralized finance platforms, and dozens more. As with cryptocurrencies, stablecoins are not generally
accepted for payment and are primarily used when trading
Transacting with Crypto crypto. Stablecoins may attempt to match their value to
On-chain transactions are transactions processed over the equivalent fiat currencies in different ways but have been
blockchain, the network of nodes that maintain the system. known to lose their stable values. For more, see CRS In
Users send and receive cryptocurrency on-chain using Focus IF11968, Stablecoins: Background and Policy Issues.
unhosted wallets that store the keys that secure ownership
of and permit transaction of crypto. Assets on a blockchain Central Bank Digital Currency
are protected by asymmetric key cryptography, which uses The premise of central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) is
a public key to encrypt and a private key to decrypt data. that issuing and managing a digital currency by a central
https://crsreports.congress.gov
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
bank may realize at least some of the anticipated benefits of framework for MSBs is largely a state-based licensing
cryptocurrencies but with greater efficiency and fewer risks. regime and applies to many nonbank institutions, including
For example, CBDCs could be used for payments, much the several crypto-related companies, such as trading platforms,
way crypto was intended. However, CBDCs would be legal payment platforms, and crypto automated teller machines.
tender and exist as dollars themselves instead of having At the federal level, these various crypto firms are
values designed to be linked to dollars. For more, see CRS considered MSBs and must register with the Financial
In Focus IF11471, Central Bank Digital Currencies. Crimes Enforcement Network and comply with the Bank
Secrecy Act and implement anti-money laundering (AML)
Crypto Regulation and know your customer (KYC) programs. For more, see
Currently, there is no comprehensive regulatory framework CRS Report R46486, Telegraphs, Steamships, and Virtual
for crypto, but regulators may apply existing regulatory Currency: An Analysis of Money Transmitter Regulation.
frameworks when applicable to crypto.
Selected Policy Issues
Applicable SEC Framework The relative novelty of how cryptocurrency transactions
In an April 2022 speech, Gary Gensler, chair of the occur introduces a host of policy issues.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), stated that
Privacy vs. illicit activity: The same characteristics that
“many of the tokens trading on these [crypto trading and
make crypto a favorite of users with a legitimate desire for
lending platforms] may well meet the definition of
privacy also provides secrecy that may make it useful for
‘securities.’” If so, both the tokens and platforms are
engaging in illicit activity. Balancing the potential privacy
required to register with the SEC and become subject to
provided by crypto’s pseudonymity with the requirement
SEC regulation. Traditionally, the SEC has used the Howey
that financial firms comply AML/KYC programs is as a
Test to determine whether any investment contract—not
key policy issue.
just cryptocurrencies—is a security. According to the
Howey Test, an investment contract is defined by four key Energy and the environment: The PoW consensus
features: (1) the investment of money (2) in a common mechanism used by some cryptocurrencies requires use of
enterprise (3) with a reasonable expectation of profits and sophisticated computers and significant amounts of energy
(4) to be derived from the efforts of others. For more, see to power and cool the equipment. Recent estimates of the
CRS Report R46208, Digital Assets and SEC Regulation. Bitcoin network’s annual energy consumption put the
amount at about 147 terawatt hours, or roughly equivalent
Applicable CFTC Framework to the amount of energy used by Malaysia. In light of this
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) issue, some market participants have shifted to the less
administers the Commodity Exchange Act, which defines energy-intensive PoS consensus protocol. Moreover,
commodities as various agricultural products—such as various federal agencies are examining the impacts these
wheat and cotton, among others—as well as services and technologies have on the environment. For more, see CRS
rights in which futures may be dealt. Using this definition, Report R45863, Bitcoin, Blockchain, and the Energy
in 2015 the agency brought an enforcement action against a Sector.
Bitcoin options and futures platform, concluding that
Future of regulation: Traditional financial institutions are
Bitcoin and other virtual currencies are “commodities.”
subject to an array of regulations, such as prudential
Various federal court decisions have since supported the
standards or disclosures requirements. In the crypto
CFTC’s position that the Commodity Exchange Act’s
industry, on the other hand, non-compliance with and
definition of the term commodity encompasses virtual
uneven enforcement of applicable frameworks has created
currency. Entities offering trading of crypto futures and
the impression that the industry is not subject to those rules
options must register with the CFTC, whose authority in
or is breaking them. Potential future crypto regulation may
spot (cash) markets is limited to enforcing prohibitions on
choose to require disclosure, segregation of customer funds,
fraud and manipulation.
and limitations on platforms’ tendency to play multiple
roles simultaneously that some say lead to conflicts of
Applicable Banking Framework
interest—all of which are required in traditional finance.
Various states, including New York and Wyoming, have
established frameworks in which crypto firms may obtain The regulatory policy debate has focused on whether a
special state banking charters. At the federal level, national regulatory regime that is tailored for crypto is necessary.
banks can seek approval from the Office of the Comptroller Other key policy issues can be summed up in three
of the Currency to provide limited crypto services, such as unanswered questions: Is the current authority sufficient, or
crypto custody services, holding reserves, and using node is congressional action required? If new regulatory
verification networks and stablecoin for payments. In authority is required, who should be the primary regulator?
addition, a crypto firm may seek a national bank trust Is it better to create a new, overarching structure, or is a
charter, which limits the holder to “fiduciary capacity” refinement of the existing framework sufficient?
operations permitted by federal statute and laws in the trust
bank or company’s home state. Firms with bank charters Consumer and investor protection: Some argue that
become subject to federal bank regulation. For more, see numerous scams and frauds—recently embodied by the
CRS In Focus IF12320, Crypto and Banking: Policy Issues. collapse of FTX—highlight a lack of investment and
consumer protections in the industry.
Applicable Money Services Business Framework
Cryptocurrency exchanges often register as money services Paul Tierno, Analyst in Financial Economics
businesses (MSBs) in order to operate. The regulatory
https://crsreports.congress.gov
Introduction to Cryptocurrency
IF12405
Disclaimer
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress.
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.
https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF12405 · VERSION 1 · NEW

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/cryptocurrencies-done.pdf
rba.gov.au/education
twitter.com/RBAInfo
facebook.com/
ReserveBankAU/
youtube.com
/user/RBAinfo
Digital Currencies
What are Cryptocurrencies? their use as a new and unique system for making
payments. Related to this, there has also been
Cryptocurrencies are digital tokens. They are a type a high degree of volatility in the prices of many
of digital currency that allows people to make cryptocurrencies. For example, the price of Bitcoin
payments directly to each other through an online increased from about US$30,000 in mid 2021 to
system. Cryptocurrencies have no legislated or almost US$70,000 toward the end of 2021 before
intrinsic value; they are simply worth what people falling to around US$35,000 in early 2022. Rival
are willing to pay for them in the market. This is in cryptocurrencies like Ether have experienced
contrast to national currencies, which get part of similar volatility. The extraordinary interest in
their value from being legislated as legal tender. cryptocurrencies has also seen a growing amount
There are a number of cryptocurrencies – the most of computing power used to solve the complex
well-known of these are Bitcoin and Ether. codes that many of these systems use to help
protect them from being corrupted. Despite the
Activity in cryptocurrency markets has increased
increased level of interest in cryptocurrencies, there
significantly. The fascination with these currencies
is scepticism about whether they could ever replace
appears to have been more speculative (buying
more traditional payment methods or national
cryptocurrencies to make a profit) than related to
currencies.
Cryptocurrency Prices
$US $US
60,000 6,000
Bitcoin (LHS)
40,000 4,000
Ether (RHS)
20,000 2,000
0 0
2014 2016 2018 2020 2022
Source: Coindesk.com
RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA | Education Cryptocurrencies 1
How Does a Cryptocurrency Transaction Work?
Cryptocurrency transactions occur through electronic messages that are sent to the entire
network with instructions about the transaction. The instructions include information such as
the electronic addresses of the parties involved, the quantity of currency to be traded, and a
time stamp.
Suppose Alice wants to transfer one unit of cryptocurrency to Bob. Alice starts the transaction
by sending an electronic message with her instructions to the network, where all users can
see the message. Alice's transaction is one of a number of transactions that have recently been
sent. Since the system is not instantaneous, the transaction sits with a group of other recent
transactions waiting to be compiled into a block (which is just a group of the most recent
transactions). The information from the block is turned into a cryptographic code and miners
compete to solve the code to add the new block of transactions to the blockchain.
Once a miner successfully solves the code, other users of the network check the solution and
reach an agreement that it is valid. The new block of transactions is added to the end of the
blockchain, and Alice's transaction is confirmed. (This confirmation is not instant as it takes time
for six blocks of transactions to be processed so that users can be certain that their transaction
has been successful.)
1 2 3
Alice sends instructions to
Miners group the transaction Information from the new block is
transfer cryptocurrency to Bob.
together into a 'block' with other transformed into a cryptographic
Anyone using the network can
recently sent transactions. code.
view the message.
Transaction
Block
Alice
66925flda83c5435
da73d81e013974d
4 5 6
Miners compete to find the code Once the code is solved, the
that will add the new block to the block is added to the blockchain Bob receives the cryptocurrency.
blockchain. and the transaction is confirmed.
Bob
2 RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA | Education Cryptocurrencies
Is Cryptocurrency Money? What is Central Bank
Digital Currency?
A frequently asked question is whether
cryptocurrency can be defined as ‘money’. The
A Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) can most
short answer is that cryptocurrency is not a form
easily be understood as a digital form of cash. It
of money. To understand why, we can ask whether
can be issued by the central bank, accessible to
the characteristics of cryptocurrencies match the
the general public, and used to settle transactions
key characteristics of money:
between firms and households. The unit of
• Widely accepted means of payment – account would be the national currency, and it
can cryptocurrencies be used to buy and sell could be exchanged at parity (i.e. one for one) with
things? Money generally comes in the form of other forms of money, such as physical currency
a nation's currency, and is widely accepted as or electronic deposits with well-regulated financial
a means of payment. While cryptocurrencies institutions.
can be used to buy and sell things, they are not
What are the main differences between
widely accepted as a means of payment, and
cryptocurrencies and CBDCs? In other words, what
surveys suggest that only a small fraction of
makes a CBDC money? A central bank has the
cryptocurrency holders use them regularly for
ability to ensure that a digital currency it issues
payments.
exhibits the three main features of money – that
• Store of value – can the purchasing power is, a CBDC could function as a widely accepted
of cryptocurrencies (their ability to purchase means of payment, store of value and unit of
a similar basket of goods and services) be account.
maintained over time? Large fluctuations in the
Because it is issued by a central bank, a CBDC
price of many cryptocurrencies mean that their
would have legal tender status, making it widely
purchasing power is not maintained over time,
accepted as a means of payment. A CBDC would
reducing their effectiveness as a store of value.
also be an equivalent store of value to other forms
• Unit of account – are cryptocurrencies a of money, since it could be exchanged for an
common way of measuring the value of equal value of physical cash or electronic deposits.
goods and services? In Australia, the prices of Finally, the unit of account for CBDC issued by the
goods and services are measured in Australian Reserve Bank would be the Australian dollar. This
dollars. While some businesses may accept means it could be used to measure the value of
cryptocurrencies as payment, they are not goods and service. These and other key features
commonly used to measure and compare have been summarised in the table below.
prices.
So, while cryptocurrencies can be used to make
payments, currently their use as a means of
payment is limited and they do not display the key
characteristics of money.
However, there is one type of digital currency that
could be considered money – digital currency
issued by a central bank.
RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA | Education Cryptocurrencies 3
Features of Money: Cryptocurrency versus CBDCs
CHARACTERISTIC CRYPTOCURRENCIES CBDCs
Accepted by a small number
Means of payment Universally accepted, legal tender
of retailers
Tend to be volatile, depends Stable, consistent with central
Store of value
on market price bank price stability mandate
Fiat currency (e.g. Australian
Unit of account Own unit of account
dollars)
Typically decentralised, relies
Governance on consensus between large Centralised
number of entities.
Typically a large number of
Transaction verification Small number of trusted entities
competing entities
Surveys conducted by the Bank for International What Are Some of the Public
Settlements indicate that CBDCs are an active
Policy Implications?
area of research for nearly all central banks.
Despite this, only a few central banks have
Some of the technology behind cryptocurrencies
actually issued digital currencies – to date no high
raises a number of considerations for public
income country has issued a CBDC. The Reserve
policymakers. Given the anonymity provided by
Bank remains cautious about whether issuing a
cryptocurrency systems, and their worldwide
CBDC would be in the public interest. Primarily,
reach, there are questions about how to
this is because many of the benefits of CBDCs
limit the use of digital currencies for criminal
have largely already been realised by existing
activities. In addition, the current fascination
technologies. In a 2021 speech, the Head of
with cryptocurrencies has potentially added to
Payment’s said:
the speculative nature of these markets, and has
Reserve Bank staff have not been convinced to raised concerns around consumer protection. If
date that a strong policy case has emerged in cryptocurrencies were to be more widely adopted,
Australia for a CBDC. The primary reason has been they could also present some challenges for the
that Australia’s existing electronic payments system role of the banking sector and raise additional
already provides households and businesses with financial stability concerns in a crisis. Furthermore,
a wide range of safe, convenient and low cost the vast amounts of electricity used in the
payment services. mining of cryptocurrency raise concerns about
the allocation of resources and environmental
consequences of these payment systems.
For more information about the risks involved with
cryptocurrencies, see ASIC’s MoneySmart website.
4 RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA | Education Cryptocurrencies
In contrast, a CBDC could potentially support a ‘… the RBA is open to this possibility. To date,
number of public policy objectives, including though, we have not seen a strong public
safeguarding public trust in money and promoting policy case to move in this direction, especially
efficiency, safety, resilience and innovation in the given Australia's efficient, fast and convenient
payment system. The Reserve Bank is continuing to electronic payments system. It is possible, however,
closely examine the case for a CBDC and working that the public policy case could emerge quite
with other central banks on this issue. The Reserve quickly as technology evolves and consumer
Bank is considering the relevant technical issues, as preferences change. It is also possible that these
well as the broader policy implications. tokens could offer a lower-cost solution for some
types of payments than provided by the existing
While the Reserve Bank has not yet made a
technologies.’
decision on whether to issue a CBDC, the Governor
noted in his 2021 speech ‘Payments: The Future?’ For more information on the Reserve Bank’s
that: research, see: Central Bank Digital Currency.
Features of the Bitcoin System
The most well known cryptocurrency is Bitcoin. Bitcoin was launched in 2009, a year after a
report that described the Bitcoin system was released under the name Satoshi Nakamoto. The
system was designed to electronically mimic features of a cash transaction. It was designed to
allow peer-to-peer (or person-to-person) transactions, without the need to know or trust the
other person in the transaction, and to occur without the need for a central party (such as a
bank). Unlike conventional national currencies such as Australian dollars, which get part of their
value from being legislated as legal tender, Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies do not have
any legislated or intrinsic value. Instead, the value of Bitcoin is determined by what people are
willing to pay for it in the market (and, in theory, its value could fall to zero at any time).
One feature of the Bitcoin system is that the supply of Bitcoins increases at a pre-determined
rate and is capped at around 21 million (with each bitcoin able to be subdivided into 100
million satoshis or 0.00000001 bitcoins). Because of this, the supply of Bitcoins has been
commonly compared to the supply of a scarce commodity, such as gold.
The Bitcoin system allows transactions to occur directly from person to person without
requiring a central party (such as a bank) to verify or record the transactions. This is unlike most
conventional payment methods, such as electronic bank transfers, which rely on a central party
to keep and update records of transactions. For example, commercial banks maintain a record
of their customers' account balances, deposits and withdrawals.
Instead, the Bitcoin system uses ‘blockchain’ technology to record transactions and the
ownership of bitcoins. This is essentially technology that connects groups of transactions
(‘blocks’) together over time (in a ‘chain’). Each time a transaction occurs, it forms part of a new
block that is added to the chain. As a result, the blockchain provides a record (or database) of
every bitcoin transaction that has ever occurred, and it is available for anyone to access and
RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA | Education Cryptocurrencies 5
update on a public network (this is often referred to as a ‘distributed ledger’). The integrity of
the Bitcoin system is protected by ‘cryptography’, which is a method of verifying and securing
data using complex mathematical algorithms (or codes). This makes the system very difficult to
corrupt.
Bitcoin transactions are verified by other users of the network, and the process of compiling,
verifying and confirming transactions is often referred to as ‘mining’. In particular, complex
codes need to be solved to confirm transactions and make sure the system is not corrupted.
The Bitcoin system increases the complexity of these codes as more computing power is
used to solve them. A new block of transactions is compiled approximately every ten minutes.
‘Miners’ want to solve the codes and process transactions because they are rewarded with new
bitcoins (currently 6.25 new Bitcoins per block).
The increase in competition between miners for new Bitcoins has seen large increases in the
amount of computing power and electricity required (which is often used for air conditioning
to cool computer systems). While it is difficult to calculate with precision, some estimates
suggest that the annual energy consumption of the Bitcoin system is roughly equal to the
country of Thailand.
This explainer is provided to facilitate the conceptual understanding of cryptocurrencies.
It does not constitute advice, or a recommendation, to buy, trade or invest in Bitcoin or any other
cryptocurrency. If you decide to trade or use cryptocurrencies you may be taking on risk
for which there is no recourse.
For more information about these risks see ASIC’s MoneySmart website.
References
Lowe, Philip (2021), ‘Payments: The Future?’, Address to the 2021 Australian Payments Network
Summit, 9 December 2021
Richards, Tony (2021). ‘The Future of Payments: Cryptocurrencies, Stablecoins or Central Bank Digital
Currencies?’, Address to the Australian Corporate Treasury Association, 18 November.
6 RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA | Education Cryptocurrencies

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/3SpotFraudSites.pdf
10 SIGNS OF A SCAM CRYPTO
OR FOREX TRADING WEBSITE
The vast majority of frauds involving cryptocurrency or foreign currency trading,
$
also known as forex, begin on social media or through messaging apps. If
someone contacts you out of the blue, or you meet someone online who introduces
you to a trading website you’ve never heard of before, chances are it’s a fraud.
It doesn’t matter how much scam trading websites claim you will earn, or how easy or risk-free
they say it will be, you will lose any money you give them. Besides trolling for victims on social
media or messaging apps, here are 10 other telltale signs an online trading platform is a fraud:
1. It isn’t registered to trade forex, business. Avoid companies that don’t have a
futures, or options. U.S. headquarters. If the trading platform is
offshore, you may have little or no protections if
something were to go wrong.
Many scam websites offer a mix of crypto
assets, forex trading, binary options, futures, or
4. There is no customer service
other derivatives. But in order to solicit U.S.
customers, entities that trade forex or derivatives phone line.
must register with the CFTC and be members of
the National Futures Association. You can Just like missing addresses, no customer
check registrations at service phone number is a sure indicator of a
nfa.futures.org/basicnet. scam trading platform. Fraudulent trading
websites might display messaging-app phone
2. Trades crypto, but not registered numbers, but these are easy to fake and easy to
change. It’s also common for scam sites to only
as a money service business.
offer live chat (often a chat-bot), email
addresses, or “contact us” web forms. But when
Cryptocurrency trading platforms are considered
scams are exposed, the websites disappear,
money service businesses (MSBs) by the U.S.
along with any way of communicating with them.
Treasury and must register with the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). Many
5. The website’s age doesn’t match
states also have requirements for
cryptocurrency trading websites to register. To its claims.
see if a site is registered, visit fincen.gov/msb-
registrant-search. Registration alone won’t Look up domain registrations at
protect you from fraud, but most scams involve lookup.icann.org. The search results will tell
unregistered entities, people, and products. you when the web address was created. If the
company claims to have been around for several
3. No physical address, it’s clearly years, but the domain registration is only a few
fake, or offshore. weeks old, you’ll know it’s a scam. Other trading
websites may claim to have millions of
customers or conduct billions of dollars in
If a centralized cryptocurrency or forex trading
trades, but such claims would be highly unlikely
platform doesn’t display a company address, it
if the site were only weeks or months old. Also,
means the site’s owners don’t want you to know
be suspicious of websites that look or sound
where they are. If there is an address, run a
similar to other well-known brands, or that don’t
street-view map search to see if the address is
end with dot-com.
real and looks like a legitimate place of
How
6. The website won’t accept 9. Winner of so many awards you’ve
transfers from your bank. never heard of.
Scam trading platforms won’t connect to Scam sites like to try to build credibility by
legitimate financial institutions because they’ll be showing off awards and trophies that read “Best
discovered as frauds. Instead, the scammers will Site,” “Customer Satisfaction,” or something
walk you through how to convert dollars to equally generic. If you’ve never heard of the
cryptocurrency on a legitimate trading platform awards and it’s not clear who gave them, don’t
first, and then ask you to transfer the crypto to trust them.
them. Remember, blockchain transactions don’t
have anti-fraud security systems like ACH bank 10. Raving testimonials.
transfers or credit card purchases. Instead, they
obscure the scammers’ true identities and are Fake testimonials are another way scam
irreversible. By the time you discover your websites try to build trust. Be critical of customer
money’s been stolen, it’s too late. reviews that appear on the website. Instead, run
a search using the site’s domain name along
7. Investment returns are based on with the words “scam,” “fraud,” or “reviews” to
see if previous users have posted warnings.
how much you invest.
Also, check websites that detect or track frauds,
Many fraudulent trading sites offer “investment like cftc.gov/redlist.
plans” that promise returns of 50, 75, 100, 200
percent or more depending on how much you
Report suspicious sites:
give them. When it comes to investing in crypto
assets, there are no risk-free investments or Visit cftc.gov/redlist to report unregistered
guaranteed returns. These kinds of plan websites offering forex or derivatives trading.
upgrades are ploys to coax victims out of more
money.
To report fraud, contact:
8. Broken links, poor spelling, and
• The CFTC at cftc.gov/complaint
bad grammar.
• The FBI’s Internet Crime Complaint
Center at IC3.gov
Scam sites generally have short life spans. As
• The Securities and Exchange
soon as a fraud is discovered, the website will
Commission at
disappear only to pop up again under a different
https://www.sec.gov/tcr
brand and web address. This means scam sites
• The Federal Trade Commission at
are often put together in a hurry. Criminals will
reportfraud.ftc.gov
often use translation software to run their scams
• Your state regulator, attorney general,
in multiple countries. Be suspicious if you spot
and local law enforcement
misspelled words, obvious grammatical errors,
odd syntax, or other such mistakes. Likewise,
Learn more at: cftc.gov/LearnAndProtect
broken links and pages “under construction,” are
common on scam sites.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission
1155 21st Street NW
Washington, DC, 20581
cftc.gov | 866-FON-CFTC (866-366-2382)
This publication was prepared by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission’s Office of Customer Education and Outreach. It is provided for
educational purposes only and does not provide legal or investment advice to any individual or entity. Please consult with your own legal or
investment advisor before taking any action based on this information. The CFTC cannot attest to the accuracy of information contained in any
nonCFTC references or websites. References in this publication to any organizations or the use of any organization, trade, firm, or corporation
name is for informational purposes only and does not constitute endorsement or recommendation by the CFTC.

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/1w25882.pdf
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
COMMON RISK FACTORS IN CRYPTOCURRENCY
Yukun Liu
Aleh Tsyvinski
Xi Wu
Working Paper 25882
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25882
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019
We thank Nicola Borri, Markus Brunnermeier, Kent Daniel, Zhiguo He, Andrew Karolyi, Alan
Kwan, Ye Li, Nikolai Roussanov, Jinfei Sheng, Michael Sockin, and Jessica Wachter for
comments. We are grateful to Colton Conley and Dean Li for their excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Yukun Liu, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Xi Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Common Risk Factors in Cryptocurrency
Yukun Liu, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Xi Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 25882
May 2019
JEL No. G12
ABSTRACT
We find that three factors – cryptocurrency market, size, and momentum – capture the cross-
sectional expected cryptocurrency returns. We consider a comprehensive list of price- and
market-related factors in the stock market, and construct their cryptocurrency counterparts. Nine
cryptocurrency factors form successful long-short strategies that generate sizable and statistically
significant excess returns. We show that all of these strategies are accounted for by the
cryptocurrency three-factor model.
Yukun Liu Xi Wu
Department of Economics Stern School of Business
Yale University New York University
New Haven, CT 06520-8268 New York, NY 10012
yukun.liu@yale.edu xwu@stern.nyu.edu
Aleh Tsyvinski
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
a.tsyvinski@yale.edu
1 Introduction
The cryptocurrency market has experienced rapid growth. This market allows companies
to raise money without engaging with venture capitalists and to be traded without being
listed on stock exchanges. The entire set of coins in the crypto market ranges from well-
known currencies such as Bitcoin, Ripple, and Ethereum to much more obscure coins. There
are two views on the cryptocurrency market. The first is that most and perhaps all of the
coins represent bubbles and fraud. The second is that the blockchain technology embodied
in coins may become an important innovation and that at least some coins may be assets
that represent a stake in the future of this technology. If the latter case is true, analyzing the
cryptocurrency market from the empirical asset pricing point of view is important for at least
two reasons. The first reason is to understand whether the returns of cryptocurrencies share
similarities with other asset classes, most importantly, with equities. The second reason is
to establish a set of empirical regularities that can be used as stylized facts and important
inputs to assess and develop theoretical models of cryptocurrency.
In this paper, we study the cross-section of cryptocurrency returns. Our primary goal
is to examine this market using standard empirical asset pricing tools. We consider all of
the coins with market capitalizations above one million dollars and their returns from the
beginning of 2014 to the end of 2018. The number of such coins grew from 109 in 2014 to
1,583 in 2018.
We examine whether the characteristics that are deemed important in the cross-section
of equity returns are also present in the cryptocurrency market. We find that many of the
known characteristics in the equity market also form successful long-short trading strategies
in the cross-section of cryptocurrencies. In particular, three factors – cryptocurrency market,
size, and momentum – capture most of the cross-sectional expected returns.
The literature on the stock market established a number of factors that explain the
cross-section of stock returns. Among the factors compiled by Feng et al. (2017) and Chen
and Zimmermann (2018), we select those that are constructed based only on price and
market information – 25 such factors in total. We first describe the construction of the
cryptocurrency counterparts for all these factors in the cross-section of cryptocurrencies.
There are broadly four groups of factors: size, momentum, volume, and volatility. We also
construct a coin market return using all of the coins for which the data is readily available.
The coin market return series comprises 1,707 coins weighted by their market capitalization.
We then analyze the performance of all the 25 factors in the cryptocurrency market.
1
Each week, we sort the returns of individual cryptocurrencies into quintile portfolios based
on the value of a given factor. We track the return of each portfolio in the week that follows
and calculate the average excess return over the risk-free rate of each portfolio. We then
form the long-short strategy based on the difference between the fifth and the first quintiles.
We find that the returns of the zero-investment strategies are statistically significant for 9
out of the 25 factors. Specifically, these are: market capitalization, price, and maximum
price; one-, two-, three-, and four-week momentum; dollar volume; and standard deviation
of dollar volume. We now turn to the detailed description of the results for each group of
factors.
For the statistically significant size related strategies, a zero-investment long-short strat-
egy that longs the smallest coins and shorts the largest coins generates more than 3 percent
excess weekly returns (3.4 percent for the market capitalization, 3.9 percent for the end of
week price, and 4.1 percent for the highest price of the week strategies). For the momen-
tum strategies, a zero-investment long-short strategy that longs the coins with compara-
tively large price increases and shorts the coins with comparatively small increases generates
about 3 percent excess weekly returns (2.7 percent for one-week momentum, 3.3 percent for
two-week momentum, 4.1 percent for three-week momentum, and 2.5 percent for four-week
momentum strategies). For the volume related strategies, a zero-investment strategy that
longs the lowest volume coins and shorts the highest volume coins generates about 3 per-
cent excess weekly returns (3.2 percent for the dollar volume). For the volatility strategy, a
zero-investment strategy that longs the lowest dollar volume volatility coins and shorts the
highest dollar volume volatility coins generates about 3 percent excess weekly returns. For
all of these factors, the returns on individual quintile portfolios are almost monotonic with
the quintiles. Determining the cryptocurrency factors that predict the cross-section of the
entire cryptocurrency space is the first main result of the paper.
Next, we investigate whether these nine cross-sectional cryptocurrency return predictors
can be spanned by a small number of factors. Our second main result is to develop a factor
model for the cross-section of the cryptocurrency returns. We first consider a one-factor
model with the coin market factor only. This is, in essence, a cryptocurrency CAPM model.
The results are similar to those found in other asset classes – the model performs poorly
in pricing the cross-section of the coin returns. The alphas for most of the successful zero-
investment strategies remain large and statistically significant. The alphas for some of the
strategies decrease marginally. The explanatory power of the model is low, with the R2s of
the long-short strategies ranging from about zero percent for the one-week momentum to
2
6.8 percent for the maximum day price strategies.
We next show that a three-factor model with the cryptocurrency market factor (CMKT),
a cryptocurrency size factor (CSMB), and a cryptocurrency momentum factor (CMOM), ac-
counts for the excess returns of all of the nine successful zero-investment strategies. Adjusted
for the cryptocurrency three-factor model, none of the alphas of the nine strategies remains
statistically significant. The CSMB factor accounts for the following strategies: market cap-
italization, price, maximum day price, dollar volume, and the standard deviation of dollar
volume. The CMOM factor accounts for the two-week, three-week, and four-week momen-
tum strategies. Both CSMB and CMOM account for the one-week momentum strategy. We
conclude that the cryptocurrency three-factor model captures the cross-section of expected
returns of cryptocurrencies.
Finally, we note several additional results. First, as the construction of the long-short
strategies relies on the ability to short coins, a natural criticism of our findings is that short
selling is either not possible or limited for most of the coins. We thus analyze each strategy
that shorts Bitcoin instead of shorting the relevant quintile portfolio. The results virtually
do not change. Second, we find that the momentum strategies perform significantly better
among the larger coins. The momentum strategy in the below median size group generates
statistically insignificant 0.6 percent weekly excess returns; the momentum strategy in the
above median size group generates statistically significant 4.2 percent weekly returns. We
also show that the stock market factor models, such as the Fama-French 3-factor, Carhart
4-factor, and the Fama-French 5-factor models, do not account for the cross-section of cryp-
tocurrency returns. Additionally, we show that the procedure that removes the unpriced
risks similar to Daniel et al. (2018) strengthens the cryptocurrency size factor but not the
cryptocurrency momentum factor. One possible explanation is that loadings on the cryp-
tocurrency momentum factor are more transient than loadings on the cryptocurrency size
factor.
We briefly discuss the relationship to the literature. Size and momentum are among
the most studied strategies in asset pricing. The size effect in the stock market is first
documented in Banz (1981). Fama and French (1992) show that size and value are important
factors in explaining the cross-section of expected stock returns. Our findings on momentum
are related to many papers on the topic such as Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), Moskowitz
and Grinblatt (1999), Moskowitz et al. (2012), Asness et al. (2013). The use of factor models
to analyze asset returns dates back to the papers of Fama and French (1993) and Fama and
French (1996). Lustig et al. (2011), Szymanowska et al. (2014), and Bai et al. (2018) develop
3
factor models for the currency, commodity, and corporate bond markets, respectively.
Yermack (2015) is one of the first papers that brings academic attention to the field of
cryptocurrency. A number of recent papers develop models of cryptocurrencies (see, e.g.,
Weber, 2016; Biais et al., 2018a; Chiu and Koeppl, 2017; Cong and He, 2018; Cong et al.,
2018a; Cong et al., 2018b; Sockin and Xiong, 2018; Schilling and Uhlig, 2018; Abadi and
Brunnermeier,2018; RoutledgeandZetlin-Jones,2018). Severalrecentpapersdocumentem-
pirical facts related to cryptocurrency investments (e.g., Stoffels, 2017; Hubrich, 2017; Borri,
2018; Borri and Shakhnov, 2018a; Borri and Shakhnov, 2018b; Hu et al., 2018; Makarov and
Schoar, 2018; Liu and Tsyvinski, 2018; Li and Yi, 2018).
2 Data
We collect trading data of all cryptocurrencies available from Coinmarketcap.com. Coin-
marketcap.com is a leading source of cryptocurrency price and volume data. It aggregates
informationfromover200majorexchangesandprovidesdailydataonopening, closing, high,
low prices, volume and market capitalization (in dollars) for most of the cryptocurrencies.1
For each cryptocurrency on the website, its price is calculated by taking the volume weighted
average of all prices reported at each market. A cryptocurrency needs to meet a list of cri-
teria to be listed, such as being traded on a public exchange with an API that reports the
last traded price and the last 24-hour trading volume, and having a non-zero trading volume
on at least one supported exchange so that a price can be determined. Coinmarketcap.com
lists both active and defunct cryptocurrencies, thus alleviating concerns about survivorship
bias.
We use daily close prices to construct weekly coin returns. Specifically, we divide each
year into 52 weeks. The first week of the year consists of the first seven days of the year. The
first 51 weeks of the year consist of seven days each and the last week of the year consists
of the last eight days of the year.2 Our sample includes 1,707 coins from the beginning of
2014 to the end of 2018. The trading volume data became available in the last week of 2013,
and thus our sample period starts from the beginning of 2014. We require that the coins
have information on price, volume, and market capitalization. We further exclude coins
with market capitalizations of less than $1,000,000. To alleviate concerns for outliers, we
winsorize all non-return variables by the 1st and 99th percentiles each week.
1Somecoinsare nottracked bythe websitebecausethecoins’exchanges donotprovide accessible APIs.
2The last week of 2016 consists of the last nine days of the year.
4
The summary statistics are presented in Panel A of Table 1. The number of coins in our
sample that satisfy all the filters increases from 109 in 2014 to 1,583 in 2018. The mean
(median) market capitalization in the sample is 356.71 (8.17) million dollars. The mean
(median) daily dollar volume in our sample is 18,305.83 (103.89) thousand dollars.
We construct a cryptocurrency market return as the value-weighted return of all the
underlying available coins. The cryptocurrency excess market return (CMKT) is constructed
as the difference between the cryptocurrency market index return and the risk-free rate
measured as the one-month Treasury bill rate. The summary statistics are presented in
Panel B of Table 1. During the sample period, the average coin market index return is 1.3
percent per week, which is higher than the average Bitcoin return (1.2 percent per week)
but is lower than the average Ripple return (3.5 percent per week) or Ethereum return
(4.6 percent per week).3 The weekly standard deviation of the coin market index return is
0.117, which is slightly higher than that of Bitcoin (0.114) but much lower than those of
Ripple (0.267) and Ethereum (0.241). The coin market index returns have positive skewness
and kurtosis. Figure 1 plots the cryptocurrency market index against Bitcoin, Ripple, and
Ethereum. The values are presented as the US dollar value of investing one dollar from the
inception of the given cryptocurrency to facilitate comparisons. The figure shows strong
correlations among the cryptocurrency market index and the investment values of the major
coins.
We obtain the stock market factors for the Fama French 3-factor, Carhart 4-factor, and
Fama French 5-factor models from Kenneth French’s website.
3Bitcoin, Ripple, andEthereumarethethreelargestcryptocurrenciesbymarketcapitalizationandthus
form a natural reference group.
5
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A reports the number of coins, the mean and median of market capitalization, and the mean and
median of daily trading dollar volume by year. Panel B reports the characteristics of coin market index
returns, Bitcoin returns, Ripple returns, and Ethereum returns. The coin market index returns, Bitcoin
returns, and Ripple returns start from the first week of 2014. The Ethereum returns start from the thirty-
second week of 2015.
Panel A
Year Number of Coins Market Cap (mil) Volume (thous)
Mean Median Mean Median
2014 109 239.83 3.89 1,146.09 36.24
2015 77 134.53 2.76 1,187.64 11.51
2016 155 160.06 3.39 1,789.24 23.73
2017 804 435.68 9.01 18,509.55 133.56
2018 1,583 357.20 8.91 20,829.12 124.02
Full 1,707 356.71 8.17 18,305.83 103.89
Panel B
Mean Median SD Skewness Kurtosis
Coin Market Return 0.013 0.006 0.117 0.294 4.574
Bitcoin Return 0.012 0.005 0.114 0.367 4.580
Ripple Return 0.035 -0.007 0.267 3.478 21.263
Ethereum Return 0.046 0.001 0.241 1.841 9.843
6
Figure 1: Cryptocurrency Market Index and Major Coins
This figure plots the cryptocurrency market index against Bitcoin, Ripple, and Ethereum.
7
3 Cross-Sectional Factors
We consider a comprehensive list of the established factors in the cross-section of stock
returns, compiled by Feng et al. (2017) and Chen and Zimmermann (2018). Among these,
we select all the factors that can be directly constructed using only the information on price,
volume, and market capitalization. The reason we consider only the market-based factors is
that financial and accounting data for the cross-section of coins is either not readily available
or not applicable. We hence investigate 25 factors, which we present in Table 2. We further
group them into four broad categories: size, momentum, volume, and volatility.
3.1 Size Factors
We analyze the performance of the zero-investment long-short strategies based on the
size-related factors: market capitalization, price, maximum price, and age. Each week, we
sort individual cryptocurrencies into quintile portfolios based on the value of a given factor.
We track the return of each portfolio in the week that follows. We then calculate the average
excess returns over the risk-free rate of each portfolio, and the excess returns of the long-
short strategies based on the difference between the fifth and the first quintiles. We find
that the first three factors generate statistically significant long-short strategy returns. The
result of the zero-investment long-short strategy for age is not statistically significant and is
summarized in the last part of the section.
Table 3 presents the results. For the first three factors, the average mean excess returns
decrease from the top to the bottom quintiles. The differences in the average returns of the
highest and lowest quintiles are -3.4 percent for market capitalization, -3.9 percent for the
end of week price, and -4.1 percent for the highest price of the week. All of these differences
are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. In other words, a zero-investment strategy
that longs the smallest coins and shorts the largest coins generates about 3 percent excess
weekly returns. Of course, this strategy does not take into account trading costs and the
feasibility of short selling. We consider strategies that short Bitcoin, and present results that
long the smallest coins and short Bitcoin in Section 5. In the Appendix, we also present
results based on tercile instead of quintile portfolios.4 The results based on tercile portfolios
4The same robustness results are presented for all other successful strategies in the Appendix.
8
are qualitatively similar.
Table 2: Factor Definitions
Category Factor Definition
Size MCAP Log last day market capitalization in the portfolio formation week
Size PRC Log last day price in the portfolio formation week
Size MAXDPRC The maximum price of the portfolio formation week
Size AGE The number of weeks that have been listed on Coinmarketcap.com
Momentum r 1,0 One-week momentum
Momentum r 2,0 Two-week momentum
Momentum r 3,0 Three-week momentum
Momentum r 4,0 Four-week momentum
Momentum r 8,0 Eight-week momentum
Momentum r 16,0 Sixteen-week momentum
Momentum r 50,0 Fifty-week momentum
Momentum r 100,0 Hundred-week momentum
Volume VOL Log average daily volume in the portfolio formation week
Volume PRCVOL Log average daily volume times price in the portfolio formation week
Volume VOLSCALED Log average daily volume times price scaled by market capitalization in
the portfolio formation week
Volatility BETA The regression coefficient βi in R −R =αi +βi CMKT +(cid:15) .
CMKT i f CMKT i
The model is estimated using daily returns of the previous 365 days
before the formation week.
Volatility BETA2 Beta squared
Volatility IDIOVOL The idiosyncratic volatility is measured as the standard deviation of
the residual after estimating R −R =αi +βi CMKT +(cid:15) . The
i f CMKT i
model is estimated using daily returns of the previous 365 days before
the formation week.
Volatility RETVOL The standard deviation of daily returns in the portfolio formation week
Volatility RETSKEW The skewness of daily returns in the portfolio formation week
Volatility RETKURT The kurtosis of daily returns in the portfolio formation week
Volatility MAXRET Maximum daily return of the portfolio formation week
Volatility DELAY The improvement of R2 in
R −R =αi+βi CMKT+βi CMKT +βi CMKT +(cid:15) ,
i f CMKT CMKT−1 −1 CMKT−2 −2 i
where CMKT and CMKT are the lagged one and two day coin
−1 −2
market index returns, compared to using only current coin market
excess returns. The model is estimated using daily returns of the
previous 365 days before the formation week.
Volatility STDPRCVOL Log standard deviation of dollar volume in the portfolio formation week
Volatility DAMIHUD The average absolute daily return divided by dollar volume in the
portfolio formation week
9
Table 3: Size Factor Returns
This table reports the mean quintile portfolio returns based on the market capitalization, last day price,
and maximum day price factors. The mean returns are the time-series averages of weekly value-weighted
portfolio excess returns. *, **, *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Quintiles
1 2 3 4 5 5-1
MCAP Low High
Mean 0.047*** 0.018 0.013 0.013 0.013* -0.034**
t(Mean) (2.958) (1.610) (1.286) (1.439) (1.766) (-2.557)
PRC Low High
Mean 0.051*** 0.029** 0.001 0.018 0.012* -0.039**
t(Mean) (2.739) (2.118) (0.117) (1.419) (1.689) (-2.420)
MAXDPRC Low High
Mean 0.053*** 0.025* 0.002 0.021 0.012* -0.041**
t(Mean) (2.791) (1.905) (0.143) (1.568) (1.681) (-2.483)
3.2 Momentum
We analyze the performance of the zero-investment long-short strategies based on the
one-, two-, three-, four-, eight-, sixteen-, fifty-, and one hundred-week momentum factors.
Each week, we sort individual cryptocurrencies into quintile portfolios based on the value of
a given factor. All strategies are rebalanced weekly. We find that the one-, two-, three-, and
four-week momentum factors generate statistically significant long-short strategy returns.
The results of the zero-investment long-short strategies for the eight-, sixteen-, fifty, and one
hundred-week momentum are not statistically significant and are summarized in the last
part of the section.
Table 4 presents the results of the successful factors for the portfolios sorted in quintiles.
For the one-, two-, three-, and four-week momentum strategies, the average mean excess
returns increase with the quintiles. The patterns are almost universally monotonic. The
10
difference in the average returns of the highest and lowest quintiles is about 3 percent for
each horizon and statistically significant at the 5 percent level (1 percent level for three-week
momentum). In other words, a zero-investment strategy that longs the coins with compara-
tivelylargeincreasesandshortsthecoinswithcomparativelysmallincreasesgeneratesabout
3 percent excess weekly returns. The differences in the average returns of the highest and
lowest quintiles are 2.7 percent for the one-week momentum, 3.3 percent for the two-week
momentum, 4.1 percent for the three-week momentum, and 2.5 percent for the four-week
momentum.
Table 4: Momentum Factor Returns
Thistablereportsthemeanquintileportfolioreturnsbasedontheone-week,two-week,three-week,andfour-
week momentum factors. The mean returns are the time-series averages of weekly value-weighted portfolio
excess returns. *, **, *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Quintiles
1 2 3 4 5 5-1
r 1,0 Low High
Mean -0.006 -0.002 0.010 0.042** 0.021 0.027**
t(Mean) (-0.552) (-0.176) (1.094) (2.317) (1.550) (1.994)
r 2,0 Low High
Mean -0.002 0.005 0.010 0.018* 0.030** 0.033**
t(Mean) (-0.225) (0.493) (1.155) (1.894) (2.314) (2.442)
r 3,0 Low High
Mean 0.002 0.001 0.016 0.020** 0.043*** 0.041***
t(Mean) (0.156) (0.124) (1.587) (2.091) (2.956) (2.742)
r 4,0 Low High
Mean 0.002 0.004 0.008 0.019* 0.027** 0.025**
t(Mean) (0.243) (0.435) (0.935) (1.921) (2.033) (2.002)
11
3.3 Volume Factors
We analyze the performance of the volume-related factors: volume, dollar volume, and
scaled volume. Each week, we sort individual cryptocurrencies into quintile portfolios based
on the value of a given factor. All strategies are rebalanced weekly. The dollar volume
strategy generates statistically significant long-short strategy returns. The results of the
zero-investment long-short strategies based on the other volume factors are not statistically
significant and are summarized in the last part of the section.
Table 5 presents the results for the portfolios sorted in quintiles based on the dollar
volume factor. The average mean excess returns decrease with the quintiles. The patterns
are mostly monotonic from the lowest to the highest quintiles. The difference in the average
returns of the highest and lowest quintiles is -3.2 percent for the dollar volume factor. The
differenceisstatisticallysignificantatthefivepercentlevel. Inotherwords,azero-investment
strategy that longs the lowest dollar volume coins and shorts the highest dollar volume coins
generates about 3 percent excess weekly returns.
Table 5: Volume Factor Returns
This table reports the mean quintile portfolio returns based on the price dollar volume factor. The mean
returns are the time-series averages of weekly value-weighted portfolio excess returns. *, **, *** denote
significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Quintiles
1 2 3 4 5 5-1
PRCVOL Low High
Mean 0.045** 0.028** 0.017 0.018 0.013* -0.032**
t(Mean) (2.438) (2.154) (1.375) (1.456) (1.745) (-2.016)
3.4 Volatility Factors
We analyze the performance of the volatility-related factors: beta, beta squared, idiosyn-
cratic volatility, the standard deviation of returns, the skewness of returns, the kurtosis of
returns, maximum day return, delay, the standard deviation of dollar volume, and Amihud’s
illiquidity measure. Each week, we sort individual cryptocurrencies into quintile portfolios
12
on the value of a given factor. All strategies are rebalanced weekly. The standard deviation
of dollar volume measure generates statistically significant long-short strategy returns, but
the other factors do not. We summarize the insignificant volatility factors in the last part of
the section.
Table 6 presents the results for the portfolios sorted in quintiles for the standard devia-
tion of dollar volume – the only factor out of ten in this group that generates statistically
significant excess returns on the long-short strategies. For the standard deviation of dollar
volume, the average mean excess returns of the portfolios decrease monotonically with the
quintiles and are statistically significant for each quintile except quintile four. The difference
in the average returns of the highest and lowest quintiles is -3.0 percent. In other words, a
zero-investment strategy that longs the lowest dollar volume volatility coins and shorts the
highest dollar volume volatility coins generates about 3 percent excess weekly returns.5
Table 6: Volatility Factor Returns
This table reports the mean quintile portfolio returns based on the standard deviation of dollar volume
factor. The mean returns are the time-series averages of weekly value-weighted portfolio excess returns. *,
**, *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Quintiles
1 2 3 4 5 5-1
STDPRCVOL Low High
Mean 0.043*** 0.032** 0.021* 0.021 0.013* -0.030**
t(Mean) (2.711) (2.114) (1.687) (1.644) (1.739) (-2.269)
5For the cross-section of cryptocurrencies, the dollar volume volatility strongly correlates with size. The
reason is that the dollar volume volatility measure is primarily driven by the differences in the price levels
ofcoins. Inthenextsection, weshowthatthedollarvolumevolatilitypremiumcanbeaccountedforbythe
cryptocurrency size factor.
13
Table 7: Insignificant Factor Returns
This table reports the mean quintile portfolio returns based on the insignificant factors. The mean returns
are the time-series averages of weekly value-weighted portfolio excess returns. *, **, *** denote significance
levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
1 2 3 4 5 5-1
Mean 0.018 0.010 0.019* 0.014 0.013* -0.005
AGE
t(Mean) (1.070) (1.034) (1.902) (1.445) (1.732) (-0.358)
Mean 0.016 0.011 0.025** 0.022** 0.022* 0.006
r 8,0
t(Mean) (1.366) (1.266) (2.016) (2.211) (1.740) (0.421)
Mean 0.017* 0.017* 0.006 0.013 0.021* 0.004
r 16,0
t(Mean) (1.693) (1.806) (0.714) (1.300) (1.661) (0.310)
Mean 0.015 0.021** 0.017 0.014 0.008 -0.008
r 50,0
t(Mean) (1.572) (2.167) (1.593) (1.447) (0.680) (-0.764)
Mean 0.032*** 0.027** 0.027* 0.024* 0.018 -0.011
r 100,0
t(Mean) (2.842) (2.556) (1.971) (1.923) (1.376) (-0.804)
Mean 0.014 0.034* 0.017* 0.014 0.013* -0.002
VOL
t(Mean) (1.237) (1.736) (1.695) (1.289) (1.780) (-0.170)
Mean 0.028* 0.035** 0.019 0.001 0.012* -0.016
VOLSCALED
t(Mean) (1.913) (2.347) (1.481) (0.120) (1.699) (-1.332)
Mean 0.019* 0.017 0.020* 0.016 0.006 -0.013
BETA
t(Mean) (1.967) (1.573) (1.817) (1.488) (0.544) (-1.256)
Mean 0.018* 0.024** 0.017 0.015 0.005 -0.012
BETA2
t(Mean) (1.847) (2.074) (1.616) (1.334) (0.484) (-1.191)
Mean 0.014* 0.027** 0.023* 0.007 0.022 0.009
IDIOVOL
t(Mean) (1.894) (2.200) (1.803) (0.564) (1.378) (0.682)
Mean 0.013 0.022** 0.026* 0.020 -0.004 -0.017
RETVOL
t(Mean) (1.549) (2.102) (1.951) (1.163) (-0.281) (-1.237)
Mean 0.011 0.002 0.020* 0.011 0.016 0.005
RETSKEW
t(Mean) (1.206) (0.270) (1.947) (1.015) (1.191) (0.383)
Mean -0.002 0.022** 0.011 0.021** 0.005 0.006
RETKURT
t(Mean) (-0.185) (2.255) (1.135) (2.009) (0.412) (0.647)
Mean 0.012 0.018* 0.013 0.030* 0.006 -0.006
MAXRET
t(Mean) (1.452) (1.691) (1.358) (1.778) (0.388) (-0.441)
Mean 0.014* 0.019* 0.018 0.018 0.012 -0.001
DELAY
t(Mean) (1.876) (1.783) (1.629) (1.338) (1.264) (-0.159)
Mean 0.013* 0.013 0.039** 0.015 0.038* 0.026
DAMIHUD
t(Mean) (1.739) (1.074) (2.159) (1.511) (1.914) (1.478)
14
3.5 Insignificant Factors
In this section, we present the table that summarizes the results for the zero-investment
strategies for the factors that do not generate statistically significant returns. There are
sixteen such factors in total: age; eight-, sixteen-, fifty-, and one hundred-week momentum;
volume, and scaled volume; beta, beta squared, idiosyncratic volatility, the standard devia-
tion of returns, the skewness of returns, the kurtosis of returns, maximum day return, delay,
and the Amihud’s illiquidity measure. Each week, we sort individual cryptocurrencies into
quintile portfolios on the value of a given factor. All strategies are rebalanced weekly.
Table 7 presents the results of the performance of the zero-investment long-short strate-
gies. Noneofthemeasuresgeneratesstatisticallysignificantlong-shortstrategyreturns. The
average mean excess returns do not change monotonically with the quintiles. The differences
in the average returns of the highest and lowest quintiles are small and statistically insignifi-
cant. For example, the sixteen-week momentum strategy generates statistically insignificant
excess returns of 0.4 percent per week on the long-short strategy.
4 Cryptocurrency Factors
In this section, we investigate whether the nine cross-sectional cryptocurrency return
predictors that we have identified can be spanned by a small number of factors. We perform
an analysis similar to that of Fama and French (1996). We first show that a one-factor model
with only the coin market return, or the cryptocurrency CAPM, cannot account for most of
the excess returns of the nine strategies. Then, we analyze two-factor models: a two-factor
model that adds the cryptocurrency size factor and a two-factor model that adds the cryp-
tocurrency momentum factor. The two-factor model with the cryptocurrency market factor
and a cryptocurrency size factor can account for the excess returns of five out of the nine
zero-investment strategies but cannot explain any of the momentum related strategies. The
two-factor model with the cryptocurrency market factor and a cryptocurrency momentum
factor can account for the four momentum related strategies but not for any of the other
strategies. Finally, we show that a three-factor model with the cryptocurrency market fac-
tor, a cryptocurrency size factor, and a cryptocurrency momentum factor explains the excess
returns of all nine strategies.
The construction of the cryptocurrency market excess returns is discussed in Section 2.
We construct the cryptocurrency size and momentum factors following the method used by
15
Fama and French (1993). Specifically, for size, each week we split the coins into three size
groups by market capitalization: bottom 30 percent (small, S), middle 40 percent (middle,
M), and top 30 percent (big, B).6 We then form value-weighted portfolios for each of the
three groups. The cryptocurrency size factor (CSMB) is the return difference between the
portfolios of the small and the big size portfolios. We construct the momentum factor
(CMOM) using the three-week momentum.7 Each week, we split the coins into three three-
week momentum groups: bottom 30 percent, middle 40 percent, and top 30 percent. Then,
we form value-weighted portfolios for each of the three three-week momentum groups. The
cryptocurrency momentum factor (CMOM) is the return difference between the top and the
bottom momentum portfolios. In the Appendix, we provide summary statistics for each of
the cryptocurrency factors.
We first consider a one-factor model with only the cryptocurrency market factor, or
the cryptocurrency CAPM. Table 8 presents the results for all the nine significant zero-
investment strategies that we have found in the previous section. The alphas for all of
the zero-investment long-short strategies remain significant. Moreover, the decreases in
magnitude are small compared to the unadjusted excess returns. The average decrease
of the zero-investment strategy alphas for the statistically significant strategies is only 8.61
percent of the orignal values. The strategies have some exposures to the coin market returns.
In particular, the zero-investment long-short strategies based on market capitalization, price,
maximum day price, dollar volume, and standard deviation of dollar volume are significantly
exposed to the coin market excess returns. The strategies based on past returns – one-week
momentum, two-week momentum, three-week momentum, and four-week momentum – are
not significantly exposed to the coin market returns. The average of the absolute value of
the statistically significant betas is 0.39 (with a range of 0.210 for the market capitalization
strategy to 0.592 for the maximum day price). However, for all the strategies, the one-factor
model does not explain a sizable portion of the excess returns, with the zero-investment
strategy R2s ranging from about zero percent for the one-week momentum strategy to 6.8
percent for the maximum day price.
6Weusemarketcapitalizationasourmainsizemeasurebecauseofthetraditioninthestockmarketsize
literature. The results are robust to using alternative measures of size.
7We use three-week momentum as our main momentum measure because it generates the largest long-
short spread in the data. The results are qualitatively similar using alternative measures of momentum.
16
Table 8: Cryptocurrency One-Factor Model
R −R =αi +βi CMKT +(cid:15) (1)
i f CMKT i
where CMKT is the cryptocurrency excess market returns. The formation of the quintile portfolios for the
nine significant strategies are discussed in Section 3. The t-statistics are reported in the parentheses. *, **,
*** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%. m.a.e and
R¯2
are the mean of the absolute pricing
errors and the average R2 of the five portfolios, respectively.
1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.031** 0.005 -0.001 0.002 0.001 -0.031**
t(α) (2.346) (0.640) (-0.148) (0.257) (1.400) (-2.284)
MCAP βCMKT 1.208*** 1.074*** 0.990*** 0.984*** 0.998*** -0.210* 0.008 0.571
t(βCMKT) (10.606) (15.302) (16.023) (18.662) (200.564) (-1.841)
R2 0.305 0.478 0.501 0.576 0.994 0.013
α 0.033** 0.013 -0.011 0.005 0.000 -0.032**
t(α) (2.153) (1.307) (-1.484) (0.502) (0.314) (-2.035)
PRC βCMKT 1.544*** 1.307*** 1.073*** 1.083*** 0.958*** -0.585*** 0.012 0.539
t(βCMKT) (11.858) (15.688) (16.277) (12.295) (89.475) (-4.299)
R2 0.355 0.490 0.509 0.371 0.969 0.067
α 0.034** 0.010 -0.011 0.008 0.000 -0.034**
t(α) (2.218) (1.009) (-1.459) (0.722) (0.271) (-2.101)
MAXDPRC βCMKT 1.551*** 1.290*** 1.070*** 1.094*** 0.958*** -0.592*** 0.013 0.533
t(βCMKT) (11.796) (15.753) (16.244) (11.579) (89.511) (-4.310)
R2 0.352 0.492 0.508 0.344 0.969 0.068
α -0.019** -0.014** -0.002 0.029* 0.009 0.028**
t(α) (-2.415) (-2.220) (-0.399) (1.754) (0.774) (2.012)
r 1,0 βCMKT 1.036*** 1.015*** 0.975*** 1.111*** 1.015*** -0.021 0.015 0.437
t(βCMKT) (15.653) (18.950) (21.158) (7.865) (10.058) (-0.175)
R2 0.489 0.584 0.636 0.195 0.283 0.000
α -0.013 -0.007 -0.002 0.006 0.018 0.031**
t(α) (-1.515) (-1.000) (-0.386) (0.955) (1.649) (2.306)
r 2,0 βCMKT 0.872*** 0.998*** 0.941*** 1.048*** 1.041*** 0.169 0.009 0.484
t(βCMKT) (11.682) (16.539) (19.940) (20.302) (11.241) (1.468)
R2 0.348 0.517 0.608 0.617 0.330 0.008
α -0.009 -0.011* 0.003 0.007 0.031** 0.040***
t(α) (-1.047) (-1.651) (0.469) (1.273) (2.431) (2.652)
r 3,0 βCMKT 0.904*** 0.994*** 0.955*** 1.037*** 1.005*** 0.101 0.012 0.459
t(βCMKT) (11.864) (17.958) (15.591) (21.437) (9.318) (0.782)
R2 0.355 0.557 0.487 0.642 0.253 0.002
17
Table3Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α -0.009 -0.008 -0.004 0.006 0.014 0.024*
t(α) (-1.333) (-1.071) (-0.770) (0.993) (1.300) (1.906)
r 4,0 βCMKT 0.939*** 0.979*** 0.959*** 1.067*** 1.064*** 0.125 0.008 0.522
t(βCMKT) (15.586) (15.407) (22.943) (21.056) (11.353) (1.174)
R2 0.487 0.481 0.673 0.634 0.335 0.005
α 0.029* 0.014 0.003 0.004 0.001 -0.028*
t(α) (1.814) (1.389) (0.309) (0.465) (0.924) (-1.758)
PRCVOL βCMKT 1.334*** 1.193*** 1.125*** 1.114*** 0.997*** -0.337** 0.010 0.520
t(βCMKT) (9.789) (14.131) (14.640) (14.268) (156.767) (-2.454)
R2 0.272 0.438 0.456 0.443 0.990 0.023
α 0.028** 0.017 0.006 0.007 0.001 -0.028**
t(α) (2.118) (1.374) (0.713) (0.689) (0.843) (-2.048)
STDPRCVOL βCMKT 1.223*** 1.292*** 1.192*** 1.209*** 0.993*** -0.230** 0.012 0.524
t(βCMKT) (10.734) (12.332) (15.557) (14.870) (152.231) (-1.997)
R2 0.310 0.373 0.486 0.463 0.989 0.015
In the last two columns, we report the absolute pricing errors and average R2s of the five
quintileportfoliosforeachstrategy. Wereportthemeanoftheabsolutepricingerrors, m.a.e,
for each strategy. The mean of the absolute pricing errors is defined as the average of the
absolute value of the alphas for all the five quintile portfolios. In particular, the m.a.e ranges
from 0.8 percent for the market capitalization and the four-week momentum strategies to 1.5
percent for the one-week momentum strategy. The average R2, R¯2, is about 50 percent for
most of the strategies, indicating that the model explains substantial fractions of the return
variations of the individual portfolios. In other words, there is strong comovement across
different coins.
18
Table 9: Cryptocurrency Market and Size Factor Model
R −R =αi +βi CMKT +βi CSMB+(cid:15) (2)
i f CMKT CSMB i
where CMKT is the cryptocurrency excess market returns and CSMB is the cryptocurrency size factor.
The formation of the quintile portfolios for the nine significant strategies are discussed in Section 3. The t-
statisticsarereportedintheparentheses. *,**,***denotesignificancelevelsatthe10%,5%,and1%. m.a.e
and R¯2 are the mean of the absolute pricing errors and the average R2 of the five portfolios, respectively.
1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.006 -0.005 -0.006 -0.004 0.001 -0.005
t(α) (1.051) (-0.740) (-0.858) (-0.712) (1.413) (-0.912)
βCMKT 1.036*** 1.004*** 0.944*** 0.946*** 0.998*** -0.037
MCAP t(βCMKT) (20.427) (17.636) (16.906) (19.744) (199.107) (-0.737) 0.004 0.755
βCSMB 1.343*** 0.548*** 0.359*** 0.300*** -0.001 -1.344***
t(βCSMB) (32.427) (11.777) (7.873) (7.667) (-0.211) (-32.480)
R2 0.864 0.662 0.598 0.656 0.994 0.808
α 0.019 0.008 -0.017** 0.002 0.001 -0.018
t(α) (1.363) (0.792) (-2.254) (0.147) (0.690) (-1.241)
βCMKT 1.448*** 1.271*** 1.037*** 1.057*** 0.962*** -0.486***
PRC t(βCMKT) (12.272) (15.661) (16.492) (12.095) (90.547) (-3.929) 0.009 0.584
βCSMB 0.748*** 0.279*** 0.278*** 0.197*** -0.025*** -0.773***
t(βCSMB) (7.762) (4.206) (5.418) (2.763) (-2.884) (-7.650)
R2 0.478 0.523 0.559 0.390 0.970 0.241
α 0.020 0.004 -0.016** 0.004 0.001 -0.019
t(α) (1.440) (0.463) (-2.176) (0.386) (0.644) (-1.319)
βCMKT 1.454*** 1.253*** 1.036*** 1.069*** 0.962*** -0.493***
MAXDPRC t(βCMKT) (12.188) (15.761) (16.389) (11.372) (90.569) (-3.941) 0.009 0.577
βCSMB 0.749*** 0.287*** 0.263*** 0.200*** -0.025*** -0.774***
t(βCSMB) (7.686) (4.424) (5.093) (2.607) (-2.871) (-7.576)
R2 0.474 0.528 0.553 0.361 0.970 0.239
α -0.021*** -0.014** -0.006 0.028* 0.004 0.025*
t(α) (-2.737) (-2.260) (-1.176) (1.661) (0.346) (1.810)
βCMKT 1.019*** 1.012*** 0.948*** 1.103*** 0.980*** -0.039
r 1,0 t(βCMKT) (15.462) (18.767) (21.743) (7.751) (9.850) (-0.327) 0.015 0.455
βCSMB 0.132** 0.021 0.208*** 0.068 0.274*** 0.141
t(βCSMB) (2.460) (0.475) (5.826) (0.584) (3.369) (1.459)
R2 0.501 0.584 0.679 0.196 0.314 0.008
19
Table9Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α -0.016* -0.010 -0.003 0.004 0.014 0.030**
t(α) (-1.841) (-1.438) (-0.611) (0.696) (1.325) (2.230)
βCMKT 0.852*** 0.977*** 0.932*** 1.037*** 1.016*** 0.164
r 2,0 t(βCMKT) (11.474) (16.416) (19.727) (20.098) (11.031) (1.415) 0.009 0.496
βCSMB 0.152** 0.160*** 0.068* 0.084** 0.190** 0.039
t(βCSMB) (2.498) (3.295) (1.751) (1.982) (2.528) (0.408)
R2 0.363 0.536 0.613 0.623 0.347 0.009
α -0.013 -0.014** 0.000 0.006 0.026** 0.039**
t(α) (-1.445) (-2.170) (0.058) (1.085) (2.093) (2.566)
βCMKT 0.880*** 0.972*** 0.935*** 1.030*** 0.975*** 0.095
r 3,0 t(βCMKT) (11.668) (17.920) (15.447) (21.211) (9.097) (0.729) 0.012 0.477
βCSMB 0.186*** 0.168*** 0.159*** 0.055 0.234*** 0.048
t(βCSMB) (3.012) (3.782) (3.207) (1.379) (2.672) (0.456)
R2 0.377 0.581 0.507 0.645 0.274 0.003
α -0.012* -0.012 -0.006 0.005 0.011 0.023*
t(α) (-1.716) (-1.615) (-1.159) (0.790) (0.997) (1.831)
βCMKT 0.921*** 0.952*** 0.946*** 1.059*** 1.041*** 0.120
r 4,0 t(βCMKT) (15.418) (15.348) (22.851) (20.834) (11.143) (1.120) 0.009 0.537
βCSMB 0.141*** 0.204*** 0.100*** 0.063 0.179** 0.038
t(βCSMB) (2.893) (4.023) (2.967) (1.516) (2.344) (0.431)
R2 0.503 0.512 0.684 0.637 0.349 0.006
α 0.008 0.006 -0.006 -0.001 0.001 -0.007
t(α) (0.646) (0.659) (-0.728) (-0.101) (1.110) (-0.575)
βCMKT 1.190*** 1.140*** 1.065*** 1.078*** 0.998*** -0.193*
PRCVOL t(βCMKT) (11.093) (14.422) (15.499) (14.236) (156.423) (-1.780) 0.004 0.623
βCSMB 1.116*** 0.408*** 0.465*** 0.276*** -0.008 -1.124***
t(βCSMB) (12.738) (6.324) (8.281) (4.460) (-1.483) (-12.726)
R2 0.555 0.514 0.571 0.483 0.990 0.402
α 0.011 0.007 -0.001 -0.001 0.001 -0.010
t(α) (1.018) (0.581) (-0.133) (-0.134) (1.124) (-0.926)
βCMKT 1.102*** 1.221*** 1.140*** 1.156*** 0.995*** -0.107
STDPRCVOL t(βCMKT) (12.379) (12.623) (16.116) (15.315) (152.720) (-1.191) 0.004 0.632
βCSMB 0.946*** 0.550*** 0.403*** 0.416*** -0.012** -0.957***
t(βCSMB) (13.011) (6.964) (6.967) (6.749) (-2.176) (-13.040)
R2 0.586 0.473 0.568 0.545 0.989 0.409
20
We then consider a two-factor model with the cryptocurrency market factor and the
cryptocurrency size factor. Table 9 presents the results for all nine strategies. The long-
short alphas for most of them, with the exception of the momentum strategies, are no longer
significant. For example, the absolute value of the alpha for dollar volume drops from 2.8
percent under the one-factor model to an insignificant 0.7 percent under the two-factor
model. All non-momentum strategies have significant exposures to the cryptocurrency size
factor. Amongthenon-momentumstrategies, theabsolutevaluesoftheirsizefactorloadings
range from 1.344 for the market capitalization factor to 0.773 for the last day price factor.
In other words, the small coins are also more illiquid and have lower trading volume, similar
to results in the stock market. Many strategies have significant loadings on CMKT, with the
exception of the market capitalization, the standard deviation of dollar volume, the one-,
two-, three- and four-week momentum factors. For all non-momentum strategies, the model
explains substantial fractions of the return variations beyond what the coin market factor
explains. Among the non-momentum strategies, the zero-investment long-short strategy
R2s range from 23.9 percent for the strategy based on the maximum day price factor to
more than 80 percent for the strategy based on the market capitalization factor. However,
this two-factor model based on the cryptocurrency market and size falls short in explaining
any of the momentum based strategies. The alphas on the momentum based strategies are
all statistically significant adjusting for this two-factor model. Compared to those of the
one-factor model, the means of absolute pricing errors decrease dramatically for the non-
momentum strategies. For example, the m.a.e of the dollar volume strategy reduces from
1.0 percent in the one-factor model to 0.4 percent in the two-factor model controlling for
the cryptocurrency market and size factors – a 60 percent decrease. The means of absolute
pricing errors do not materially change for the momentum strategies controlling for the
two-factor model.
We next consider an alternative two-factor model by combining the cryptocurrency mar-
ket factor and the cryptocurrency momentum factor. Table 10 presents the results for all
nine zero-investment long-short strategies adjusting for the alternative two-factor model.
This two-factor model performs well in capturing the excess returns of the four momen-
tum factors – one-, two-, three-, and four-week momentum factors. After controlling for
this alternative two-factor model, the alphas for all four momentum strategies are no longer
statistically significant. For example, the alpha of the one-week momentum strategy drops
from 2.8 percent under the one-factor model to 0.7 percent under this alternative two-factor
model. All four momentum strategies have statistically significant exposures to the momen-
21
tum factor. For these four strategies, their momentum factor loadings range from 0.582
for the one-week momentum to 0.985 for the three-week momentum. All non-momentum
strategies, with the exception of dollar volume, have significant exposures to the market. On
the other hand, none of the momentum strategies significantly exposes to the cryptocurrency
market factor. For the momentum strategies, this alternative two-factor model explains a
substantial fraction of the return variations in contrast to the market one-factor model or the
market and size two-factor model. The zero-investment strategy R2s range from 23.2 percent
for the one-week momentum to 56.1 percent for the three-week momentum. However, the
model underperforms in explaining the return variations of the non-momentum strategies
compared to the two-factor model with the cryptocurrency market and the cryptocurrency
size factors. The alphas of the non-momentum strategies, with the exception of the dollar
volume strategy, remain statistically significant. Compared to the one-factor model, the
means of absolute pricing errors largely decrease for the momentum factors. For example,
the m.a.e of the two-week momentum strategy reduces from 0.9 percent in the one-factor
model to 0.2 percent in the two-factor model.
Finally, we consider a three-factor model that combines the cryptocurrency market, size,
and momentum factors. Table 11 presents the results for all nine strategies. Adjusted
for the cryptocurrency three-factor model, none of the alphas for the nine strategies remains
statistically significant. We now turn to the discussion of exposures to the three factors. The
one-week momentum long-short strategy is statistically significantly exposed to both the size
and momentum factors. The market capitalization and standard deviation of dollar volume
zero-investment long-short strategies are statistically significantly exposed to the size factor
onlybutnottothemarketormomentumfactors. Thetwo-, three-andfour-weekmomentum
zero-investment long-short strategies are statistically significantly exposed to the momentum
factor only but not to the market or size factors. The following strategies are statistically
significantly exposed to both the market and size factors: price, maximum day price, and
dollar volume. None of the strategies is exposed to the market factor only. In other words,
both size and momentum are important in explaining the cross-section of expected returns
of cryptocurrencies. Compared to the one-factor model, the means of absolute pricing errors
largely decrease for all of the nine strategies.
22
Table 10: Cryptocurrency Market and Momentum Factor Model
R −R =αi +βi CMKT +βi CMOM+(cid:15) (3)
i f CMKT CSMB i
where CMKT is the cryptocurrency excess market returns and CMOM is the cryptocurrency momentum
factor. The formation of the quintile portfolios for the nine significant strategies are discussed in Section
3. The t-statistics are reported in the parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%,
and 1%. m.a.e and R¯2 are the mean of the absolute pricing errors and the average R2 of the five portfolios,
respectively.
1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.034** 0.004 0.001 0.003 0.001 -0.033**
t(α) (2.503) (0.509) (0.179) (0.458) (1.341) (-2.444)
βCMKT 1.218*** 1.071*** 0.991*** 0.989*** 0.998*** -0.219*
MCAP t(βCMKT) (10.657) (15.184) (15.956) (18.693) (199.519) (-1.920) 0.009 0.572
βCMOM -0.076 0.027 -0.007 -0.036 0.000 0.076
t(βCMOM) (-1.040) (0.609) (-0.179) (-1.067) (0.155) (1.047)
R2 0.308 0.478 0.501 0.578 0.994 0.017
α 0.035** 0.011 -0.012 0.005 0.001 -0.034**
t(α) (2.257) (1.082) (-1.490) (0.520) (0.888) (-2.088)
βCMKT 1.552*** 1.300*** 1.072*** 1.084*** 0.961*** -0.591***
PRC t(βCMKT) (11.870) (15.556) (16.178) (12.244) (90.786) (-4.319) 0.013 0.540
βCMOM -0.063 0.055 0.008 -0.008 -0.020*** 0.043
t(βCMOM) (-0.755) (1.040) (0.188) (-0.143) (-2.979) (0.491)
R2 0.356 0.492 0.509 0.371 0.970 0.068
α 0.036** 0.007 -0.012 0.008 0.001 -0.035**
t(α) (2.290) (0.761) (-1.468) (0.689) (0.850) (-2.124)
βCMKT 1.557*** 1.282*** 1.069*** 1.094*** 0.961*** -0.596***
MAXDPRC t(βCMKT) (11.792) (15.619) (16.145) (11.512) (90.851) (-4.316) 0.013 0.534
βCMOM -0.050 0.062 0.009 0.006 -0.020*** 0.030
t(βCMOM) (-0.600) (1.189) (0.203) (0.095) (-3.005) (0.344)
R2 0.353 0.495 0.508 0.344 0.970 0.068
α -0.013* -0.009 0.001 0.027 -0.006 0.007
t(α) (-1.651) (-1.507) (0.118) (1.570) (-0.527) (0.552)
βCMKT 1.057*** 1.031*** 0.985*** 1.102*** 0.963*** -0.094
r 1,0 t(βCMKT) (16.404) (19.671) (21.553) (7.772) (10.364) (-0.905) 0.011 0.473
βCMOM -0.168*** -0.125*** -0.077*** 0.070 0.414*** 0.582***
t(βCMOM) (-4.089) (-3.762) (-2.664) (0.771) (7.010) (8.781)
R2 0.520 0.606 0.646 0.196 0.399 0.232
23
Table10Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α -0.003 -0.001 0.001 0.001 0.003 0.006
t(α) (-0.350) (-0.134) (0.157) (0.088) (0.346) (0.569)
βCMKT 0.908*** 1.019*** 0.951*** 1.030*** 0.990*** 0.082
r 2,0 t(βCMKT) (13.062) (17.485) (20.365) (20.644) (11.736) (0.876) 0.002 0.542
βCMOM -0.286*** -0.170*** -0.083*** 0.145*** 0.399*** 0.685***
t(βCMOM) (-6.476) (-4.579) (-2.799) (4.583) (7.428) (11.435)
R2 0.440 0.553 0.620 0.646 0.450 0.344
α 0.004 -0.002 0.007 0.005 0.008 0.004
t(α) (0.462) (-0.399) (0.980) (0.885) (0.769) (0.435)
βCMKT 0.950*** 1.023*** 0.968*** 1.030*** 0.926*** -0.024
r 3,0 t(βCMKT) (14.006) (20.119) (15.939) (21.324) (10.364) (-0.276) 0.005 0.553
βCMOM -0.362*** -0.229*** -0.103*** 0.059* 0.623*** 0.985***
t(βCMOM) (-8.386) (-7.095) (-2.663) (1.918) (10.971) (18.005)
R2 0.494 0.630 0.501 0.647 0.493 0.561
α 0.000 -0.000 -0.001 0.004 -0.004 -0.004
t(α) (0.031) (-0.013) (-0.141) (0.639) (-0.376) (-0.422)
βCMKT 0.973*** 1.006*** 0.970*** 1.060*** 1.001*** 0.028
r 4,0 t(βCMKT) (17.809) (16.732) (23.553) (20.932) (12.419) (0.373) 0.002 0.592
βCMOM -0.266*** -0.218*** -0.085*** 0.057* 0.495*** 0.760***
t(βCMOM) (-7.652) (-5.698) (-3.249) (1.756) (9.648) (15.751)
R2 0.583 0.540 0.686 0.638 0.513 0.496
α 0.011 0.005 0.013 0.007 -0.003 -0.014
t(α) (1.233) (0.980) (1.304) (0.944) (-0.314) (-1.114)
βCMKT 1.137*** 0.888*** 1.061*** 1.006*** 1.114*** -0.023
PRCVOL t(βCMKT) (15.660) (19.048) (12.723) (16.897) (14.675) (-0.227) 0.008 0.509
βCMOM -0.235*** -0.145*** -0.025 0.099*** 0.299*** 0.534***
t(βCMOM) (-5.099) (-4.895) (-0.467) (2.611) (6.184) (8.252)
R2 0.505 0.595 0.389 0.542 0.514 0.211
α 0.029** 0.012 0.008 0.006 0.001 -0.028**
t(α) (2.118) (0.954) (0.885) (0.629) (0.912) (-2.044)
βCMKT 1.225*** 1.274*** 1.198*** 1.208*** 0.994*** -0.232**
STDPRCVOL t(βCMKT) (10.698) (12.205) (15.581) (14.775) (151.535) (-2.002) 0.011 0.527
βCMOM -0.016 0.139** -0.047 0.012 -0.002 0.015
t(βCMOM) (-0.226) (2.086) (-0.956) (0.240) (-0.445) (0.198)
R2 0.311 0.383 0.488 0.464 0.989 0.015
24
Table 11: Cryptocurrency Three-Factor Model
R −R =αi +βi CMKT +βi CSMB+βi CMOM+(cid:15) (4)
i f CMKT CSMB CHML i
where CMKT is the cryptocurrency excess market returns, CSMB is the cryptocurrency size factor, and
CMOM is the cryptocurrency momentum factor. The formation of the quintile portfolios for the nine
significant strategies are discussed in Section 3. The t-statistics are reported in the parentheses. *, **, ***
denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%. m.a.e is the mean of the absolute pricing errors.
R¯2
is
the average R2 of the five portfolios.
1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.007 -0.007 -0.006 -0.003 0.001 -0.007
t(α) (1.224) (-0.974) (-0.865) (-0.528) (1.354) (-1.091)
βCMKT 1.040*** 0.998*** 0.943*** 0.949*** 0.998*** -0.042
t(βCMKT) (20.436) (17.487) (16.802) (19.735) (198.002) (-0.818)
MCAP βCSMB 1.341*** 0.550*** 0.359*** 0.298*** -0.001 -1.342*** 0.005 0.756
t(βCSMB) (32.355) (11.833) (7.856) (7.620) (-0.205) (-32.409)
βCMOM -0.032 0.045 0.005 -0.026 0.000 0.032
t(βCMOM) (-0.981) (1.256) (0.133) (-0.857) (0.146) (0.997)
R2 0.865 0.664 0.598 0.657 0.994 0.809
α 0.020 0.005 -0.017** 0.002 0.002 -0.019
t(α) (1.435) (0.531) (-2.290) (0.149) (1.309) (-1.258)
βCMKT 1.453*** 1.262*** 1.035*** 1.058*** 0.964*** -0.488***
t(βCMKT) (12.254) (15.517) (16.370) (12.031) (92.059) (-3.927)
PRC βCSMB 0.746*** 0.282*** 0.279*** 0.197*** -0.026*** -0.772*** 0.009 0.585
t(βCSMB) (7.722) (4.260) (5.423) (2.754) (-3.065) (-7.620)
βCMOM -0.038 0.065 0.017 -0.002 -0.021*** 0.017
t(βCMOM) (-0.511) (1.254) (0.427) (-0.029) (-3.154) (0.221)
R2 0.478 0.526 0.560 0.390 0.971 0.242
α 0.021 0.002 -0.017** 0.004 0.002 -0.020
t(α) (1.476) (0.175) (-2.214) (0.337) (1.269) (-1.302)
βCMKT 1.458*** 1.243*** 1.034*** 1.067*** 0.964*** -0.494***
t(βCMKT) (12.152) (15.616) (16.268) (11.292) (92.112) (-3.924)
MAXDPRC βCSMB 0.748*** 0.291*** 0.264*** 0.201*** -0.026*** -0.774*** 0.009 0.578
t(βCSMB) (7.652) (4.489) (5.099) (2.609) (-3.053) (-7.552)
βCMOM -0.026 0.072 0.017 0.012 -0.021*** 0.005
t(βCMOM) (-0.341) (1.421) (0.428) (0.206) (-3.180) (0.060)
R2 0.474 0.532 0.553 0.361 0.971 0.239
25
Table11Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α -0.015** -0.010 -0.003 0.025 -0.012 0.003
t(α) (-1.970) (-1.535) (-0.657) (1.470) (-1.080) (0.274)
βCMKT 1.041*** 1.029*** 0.958*** 1.093*** 0.924*** -0.117
t(βCMKT) (16.198) (19.486) (22.122) (7.650) (10.171) (-1.126)
r 1,0 βCSMB 0.124** 0.014 0.204*** 0.072 0.297*** 0.173** 0.013 0.491
t(βCSMB) (2.360) (0.328) (5.776) (0.617) (4.014) (2.043)
βCMOM -0.164*** -0.125*** -0.071** 0.072 0.424*** 0.587***
t(βCMOM) (-4.022) (-3.739) (-2.581) (0.796) (7.378) (8.914)
R2 0.531 0.606 0.687 0.198 0.435 0.245
α -0.006 -0.004 -0.000 -0.001 -0.001 0.005
t(α) (-0.677) (-0.572) (-0.068) (-0.218) (-0.073) (0.430)
βCMKT 0.890*** 0.999*** 0.943*** 1.017*** 0.962*** 0.072
t(βCMKT) (12.847) (17.352) (20.136) (20.443) (11.529) (0.764)
r 2,0 βCSMB 0.136** 0.151*** 0.063* 0.092** 0.212*** 0.076 0.002 0.554
t(βCSMB) (2.415) (3.224) (1.656) (2.260) (3.123) (0.986)
βCMOM -0.282*** -0.165*** -0.081*** 0.148*** 0.405*** 0.687***
t(βCMOM) (-6.429) (-4.522) (-2.736) (4.711) (7.679) (11.466)
R2 0.452 0.571 0.624 0.653 0.470 0.347
α 0.000 -0.006 0.004 0.004 0.003 0.002
t(α) (0.053) (-0.924) (0.565) (0.680) (0.273) (0.236)
βCMKT 0.928*** 1.002*** 0.948*** 1.022*** 0.890*** -0.037
t(βCMKT) (13.819) (20.117) (15.779) (21.089) (10.160) (-0.432)
r 3,0 βCSMB 0.166*** 0.155*** 0.153*** 0.058 0.268*** 0.102 0.003 0.570
t(βCSMB) (3.039) (3.829) (3.130) (1.470) (3.758) (1.451)
βCMOM -0.356*** -0.224*** -0.098** 0.061** 0.632*** 0.988***
t(βCMOM) (-8.385) (-7.114) (-2.574) (1.983) (11.399) (18.089)
R2 0.512 0.651 0.519 0.650 0.519 0.564
α -0.002 -0.004 -0.003 0.003 -0.008 -0.005
t(α) (-0.358) (-0.557) (-0.532) (0.418) (-0.809) (-0.591)
βCMKT 0.956*** 0.981*** 0.957*** 1.051*** 0.974*** 0.018
t(βCMKT) (17.645) (16.687) (23.437) (20.700) (12.221) (0.234)
r 4,0 βCSMB 0.127*** 0.192*** 0.096*** 0.066 0.206*** 0.079 0.004 0.606
t(βCSMB) (2.876) (4.019) (2.883) (1.599) (3.174) (1.273)
βCMOM -0.262*** -0.212*** -0.082*** 0.059* 0.501*** 0.763***
t(βCMOM) (-7.632) (-5.690) (-3.171) (1.827) (9.943) (15.810)
R2 0.596 0.567 0.696 0.642 0.531 0.499
26
Table11Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.006 0.002 -0.005 0.000 0.001 -0.005
t(α) (0.433) (0.193) (-0.582) (0.024) (1.151) (-0.362)
βCMKT 1.181*** 1.125*** 1.069*** 1.082*** 0.998*** -0.183*
t(βCMKT) (10.968) (14.298) (15.483) (14.221) (155.617) (-1.688)
PRCVOL βCSMB 1.120*** 0.415*** 0.463*** 0.274*** -0.008 -1.128*** 0.003 0.626
t(βCSMB) (12.770) (6.471) (8.236) (4.425) (-1.492) (-12.759)
βCMOM 0.069 0.116** -0.029 -0.030 -0.001 -0.070
t(βCMOM) (1.014) (2.329) (-0.665) (-0.624) (-0.324) (-1.025)
R2 0.557 0.525 0.572 0.484 0.990 0.405
α 0.010 0.001 0.000 -0.002 0.001 -0.009
t(α) (0.945) (0.067) (0.017) (-0.239) (1.207) (-0.848)
βCMKT 1.100*** 1.200*** 1.145*** 1.152*** 0.995*** -0.105
t(βCMKT) (12.290) (12.499) (16.107) (15.193) (152.008) (-1.160)
STDPRCVOL βCSMB 0.947*** 0.559*** 0.401*** 0.417*** -0.012** -0.958*** 0.003 0.635
t(βCSMB) (12.986) (7.143) (6.923) (6.757) (-2.194) (-13.017)
βCMOM 0.015 0.157** -0.034 0.026 -0.002 -0.017
t(βCMOM) (0.258) (2.582) (-0.747) (0.545) (-0.540) (-0.295)
R2 0.586 0.486 0.569 0.545 0.989 0.409
5 Other Results
In this section, we describe four sets of additional results: using Bitcoin for short port-
folios, the analysis of the Fama-MacBeth regressions, using the stock market factors, and
hedging unpriced risks.
5.1 Using Bitcoin for Short Portfolios
One concern with constructing the zero-investment strategies in cryptocurrencies is that
shorting is not readily available for most of the coins. Table 12 presents the analysis of the
strategies that short Bitcoin rather than shorting the relevant factor quintiles. The results
are qualitatively similar to those of Section 4. The reason is that most of the relevant factor
quintiles behave similarly to Bitcoin. The exceptions are the momentum factors for which
the lowest quintiles behave differently from Bitcoin. As a result, the mean returns of the
one-, two-, and four-week momentum strategies are no longer statistically significant, and
the returns to the Bitcoin zero-investment strategies are somewhat different. We also report
27
the results adjusting for the one- and three-factor cryptocurrency models. For the one-
factor cryptocurrency model, the only major difference is that the alpha of the dollar volume
strategy is no longer statistically significant. Consistent with the previous section, none
of the alphas remain statistically significant controlling for the three-factor cryptocurrency
model.
5.2 Additional Cross-Sectional Results
We first present the results of the cross-sectional regressions using the Fama-MacBeth
method in Table 13. We only report the factors that form successful long-short strategies.
PanelAshowstheresultsforthesizerelatedfactors. Allofthemareindividuallystatistically
significant but not jointly significant. This is consistent with the fact that these factors are
highly correlated. Panel B shows the results for the volume related factors. The dollar
volume factor is individually statistically significant. Panel C shows the results for the
volatility factor, which is statistically significant. Panel D shows that the momentum factors
are not statistically significant in the Fama-MacBeth regressions. This is different from what
we have found in the previous section for the value-weighted portfolio strategies. A potential
reason for this discrepancy is that, in essence, the Fama-MacBeth regressions consider each
observation equally and thus are close to strategies formed on equally weighted portfolios. In
PanelE,weshowthatthemomentumstrategiesperformstronglyforthelargercoins, defined
as coins with more than 10 million dollar market capitalization. We further confirm this in
the Appendix. We double sort first on market capitalization into two groups at the median.
Then, within each size group, we sort on the past three-week returns into five groups. We
find that the long-short momentum strategy in the below median size group only generates
0.6 percent weekly returns which is not statistically significant. In contrast, the long-short
momentum strategy in the above median size group generates statistically significant 4.2
percent weekly returns. This implies that the momentum strategy works better for the
larger coins in the cryptocurrency market. This is in sharp contrast to the equity market
where momentum strategies work better among smaller stocks (see Hong et al., 2000).
28
Table 12: Bitcoin for Short Portfolios
CMKT is the cryptocurrency excess market returns, CSMB is the cryptocurrency size factor, and CMOM
is the cryptocurrency momentum factor. The formation of nine quintiles are discussed in Section 3. The
t-statistics are reported in the parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Cons t CMKT t CSMB t CMOM t R2
Mean 0.034** (2.423)
MCAP C-1 0.031** (2.216) 0.141 (1.464) 0.008
C-3 0.004 (0.601) 0.071* (1.719) 1.431*** (33.786) -0.024 (-0.716) 0.819
Mean 0.039** (2.295)
PRC C-1 0.031* (1.864) 0.397*** (3.531) 0.046
C-3 0.015 (0.978) 0.357*** (3.542) 0.850*** (8.237) -0.025 (-0.306) 0.247
Mean 0.040** (2.358)
MAXDPRC C-1 0.032* (1.924) 0.405*** (3.571) 0.047
C-3 0.016 (1.018) 0.363*** (3.572) 0.852*** (8.182) -0.012 (-0.151) 0.245
Mean 0.009 (0.694)
r1,0 C-1 0.007 (0.559) 0.085 (0.991) 0.004
C-3 -0.016 (-1.345) 0.027 (0.345) 0.378*** (4.804) 0.428*** (6.949) 0.215
Mean 0.018 (1.498)
r2,0 C-1 0.016 (1.321) 0.102 (1.277) 0.006
C-3 -0.005 (-0.439) 0.050 (0.684) 0.295*** (3.986) 0.411*** (7.083) 0.205
Mean 0.030** (2.248)
r3,0 C-1 0.036*** (2.607) 0.092 (0.800) 0.003
C-3 0.006 (0.506) 0.004 (0.054) 0.348*** (4.536) 0.636*** (10.602) 0.338
Mean 0.014 (1.204)
r4,0 C-1 0.012 (1.000) 0.122 (1.505) 0.009
C-3 -0.012 (-1.109) 0.061 (0.869) 0.290*** (4.051) 0.506*** (9.027) 0.277
Mean 0.032* (1.896)
PRCVOL C-1 0.027 (1.607) 0.254** (2.199) 0.018
C-3 0.001 (0.041) 0.186** (2.067) 1.209*** (13.087) 0.079 (1.090) 0.412
Mean 0.030** (2.109)
STDPRCVOL C-1 0.027* (1.853) 0.187* (1.908) 0.014
C-3 0.005 (0.468) 0.133* (1.751) 1.033*** (13.304) 0.023 (0.379) 0.417
29
Table 13: Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regression
This table reports the Fama-MacBeth regression results. Each factor is first sorted into five portfolios at
the end of each week. Panel A, B, C, and D are based on the sample of coins with market capitalizations
of more than 1 million dollars. Panel E is based on the sample of coins with market capitalizations of more
than10milliondollars. Thet-statisticsofthecoefficientestimatesarereportedintheparentheses.*,**,***
denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
rett+1
MCAP -0.011* -0.000
(-1.890) (-0.210)
PRC -0.008*** -0.027
PanelA
(-3.120) (-1.136)
MAXDPRC -0.008*** 0.019
(-3.256) (0.802)
PRCVOL -0.006**
PanelB
(-2.546)
>1mil STDPRCVOL -0.007***
PanelC
(-2.894)
r1,0 -0.002 -0.004
(-0.692) (-1.427)
r2,0 0.000 0.003
(0.020) (0.751)
PanelD
r3,0 -0.000 -0.002
(-0.148) (-0.499)
r4,0 -0.001 0.000
(-0.274) (0.107)
r1,0 0.005* -0.006
(1.668) (-1.520)
r2,0 0.007** 0.005
(2.095) (0.866)
>10mil PanelE
r3,0 0.007** 0.006
(1.978) (1.086)
r4,0 0.003 -0.000
(0.693) (-0.061)
30
Table 14: Fama-French Three-Factor Model
R −R =αi +βi MKT +βi SMB+βi HML+(cid:15) (5)
i f MKT SMB HML i
where MKT is the excess stock market returns, SMB is the Fama-French size factor, and HML is the Fama-
French value factor. The formation of the quintile portfolios for the nine significant strategies are discussed
in Section 3. The t-statistics are reported in the parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance levels at the
10%, 5%, and 1%. m.a.e and R¯2 are the mean of the absolute pricing errors and the average R2 of the five
portfolios.
1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.044*** 0.017 0.013 0.012 0.012 -0.032**
t(α) (2.737) (1.469) (1.220) (1.278) (1.626) (-2.372)
βMKT 0.859 0.981 0.311 0.615 0.404 -0.455
t(βMKT) (0.976) (1.573) (0.551) (1.178) (1.002) (-0.615)
MCAP βSMB -0.298 -0.966 0.124 -0.412 -0.682 -0.384 0.020 0.008
t(βSMB) (-0.210) (-0.961) (0.136) (-0.490) (-1.050) (-0.323)
βHML -1.398 0.589 -0.434 -0.642 -0.222 1.176
t(βHML) (-1.014) (0.603) (-0.491) (-0.786) (-0.352) (1.016)
R2 0.008 0.013 0.002 0.008 0.007 0.007
α 0.049** 0.027** 0.000 0.017 0.011 -0.037**
t(α) (2.551) (1.999) (0.026) (1.295) (1.560) (-2.256)
βMKT 1.254 0.503 0.624 1.125 0.396 -0.858
t(βMKT) (1.202) (0.669) (1.029) (1.578) (1.010) (-0.944)
PRC βSMB -1.295 -1.512 -0.403 -0.837 -0.592 0.702 0.021 0.008
t(βSMB) (-0.770) (-1.249) (-0.412) (-0.729) (-0.938) (0.480)
βHML -1.176 0.396 -0.395 1.071 -0.131 1.045
t(βHML) (-0.720) (0.337) (-0.416) (0.960) (-0.213) (0.734)
R2 0.008 0.007 0.005 0.014 0.006 0.006
α 0.050*** 0.024* 0.001 0.020 0.011 -0.039**
t(α) (2.603) (1.793) (0.051) (1.457) (1.553) (-2.319)
βMKT 1.180 0.499 0.609 1.111 0.395 -0.785
t(βMKT) (1.122) (0.673) (1.006) (1.482) (1.008) (-0.855)
MAXDPRC βSMB -1.565 -1.195 -0.381 -0.636 -0.592 0.972 0.021 0.007
t(βSMB) (-0.924) (-1.001) (-0.391) (-0.526) (-0.938) (0.658)
βHML -1.207 0.293 -0.257 1.083 -0.131 1.076
t(βHML) (-0.733) (0.252) (-0.271) (0.923) (-0.213) (0.749)
R2 0.008 0.005 0.004 0.012 0.006 0.006
31
Table14Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α -0.008 -0.003 0.009 0.042** 0.021 0.029**
t(α) (-0.732) (-0.321) (0.953) (2.306) (1.495) (2.094)
βMKT 0.766 0.472 0.367 1.600 -0.381 -1.148
t(βMKT) (1.291) (0.883) (0.745) (1.592) (-0.498) (-1.522)
r 1,0 βSMB 0.047 -1.340 -0.775 1.171 -1.934 -1.981 0.017 0.014
t(βSMB) (0.049) (-1.558) (-0.978) (0.724) (-1.568) (-1.631)
βHML -1.394 -0.381 -0.517 2.795* -0.588 0.806
t(βHML) (-1.499) (-0.456) (-0.671) (1.777) (-0.490) (0.682)
R2 0.016 0.011 0.006 0.026 0.013 0.027
α -0.004 0.005 0.009 0.018* 0.029** 0.034**
t(α) (-0.402) (0.457) (0.965) (1.827) (2.218) (2.498)
βMKT 0.856 0.373 -0.020 0.186 -0.190 -1.046
t(βMKT) (1.442) (0.665) (-0.041) (0.346) (-0.261) (-1.414)
r 2,0 βSMB -0.139 0.308 -1.085 -1.294 -1.933* -1.794 0.013 0.010
t(βSMB) (-0.146) (0.341) (-1.389) (-1.497) (-1.654) (-1.505)
βHML -0.783 -0.125 -0.640 0.416 -1.140 -0.357
t(βHML) (-0.842) (-0.142) (-0.843) (0.496) (-1.003) (-0.308)
R2 0.011 0.003 0.010 0.010 0.015 0.022
α 0.001 0.001 0.014 0.018* 0.043*** 0.042***
t(α) (0.130) (0.087) (1.373) (1.924) (2.961) (2.799)
βMKT 0.436 0.094 0.615 0.892* -0.798 -1.234
t(βMKT) (0.714) (0.174) (1.115) (1.718) (-0.997) (-1.507)
r 3,0 βSMB 1.219 -0.373 -0.484 -0.891 -1.864 -3.083** 0.015 0.009
t(βSMB) (1.241) (-0.431) (-0.545) (-1.065) (-1.446) (-2.338)
βHML -0.474 -0.520 -0.137 0.247 -0.177 0.297
t(βHML) (-0.496) (-0.619) (-0.158) (0.304) (-0.141) (0.232)
R2 0.011 0.002 0.005 0.014 0.015 0.038
α 0.002 0.003 0.007 0.017* 0.026* 0.024**
t(α) (0.210) (0.265) (0.843) (1.749) (1.969) (1.975)
βMKT 0.206 0.711 0.332 0.717 -0.551 -0.757
t(βMKT) (0.379) (1.251) (0.706) (1.331) (-0.750) (-1.121)
r 4,0 βSMB 0.623 -0.071 -0.850 -0.977 -1.752 -2.375** 0.011 0.009
t(βSMB) (0.712) (-0.077) (-1.120) (-1.126) (-1.479) (-2.183)
βHML -0.027 -0.279 0.405 -0.338 -1.659 -1.633
t(βHML) (-0.031) (-0.314) (0.550) (-0.401) (-1.441) (-1.544)
R2 0.003 0.007 0.007 0.010 0.020 0.036
32
Table14Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.042** 0.026** 0.015 0.017 0.012 -0.030*
t(α) (2.222) (1.987) (1.190) (1.366) (1.607) (-1.826)
βMKT 1.691 0.759 1.009 0.495 0.393 -1.299
t(βMKT) (1.648) (1.047) (1.506) (0.733) (0.973) (-1.453)
PRCVOL βSMB -1.596 -0.898 -0.803 -0.098 -0.678 0.918 0.022 0.008
t(βSMB) (-0.965) (-0.769) (-0.744) (-0.090) (-1.043) (0.638)
βHML -0.563 -0.855 -0.105 -0.509 -0.232 0.331
t(βHML) (-0.350) (-0.752) (-0.101) (-0.482) (-0.368) (0.236)
R2 0.012 0.007 0.009 0.003 0.007 0.009
α 0.040** 0.029* 0.019 0.020 0.012 -0.029**
t(α) (2.508) (1.902) (1.491) (1.528) (1.601) (-2.098)
βMKT 1.302 1.322 0.894 0.721 0.393 -0.909
t(βMKT) (1.475) (1.556) (1.300) (1.007) (0.978) (-1.215)
STDPRCVOL βSMB -1.251 -1.581 -1.137 -0.172 -0.678 0.573 0.024 0.009
t(βSMB) (-0.880) (-1.156) (-1.027) (-0.149) (-1.047) (0.475)
βHML -0.517 -0.734 -0.667 -0.417 -0.221 0.296
t(βHML) (-0.374) (-0.552) (-0.620) (-0.372) (-0.351) (0.253)
R2 0.010 0.013 0.010 0.005 0.007 0.006
5.3 Stock Market Factors
We next investigate whether the nine successful long-short strategies can be explained
by the stock market risk factors. Previous research (e.g., Asness et al., 2013) finds that
value and momentum strategies comove strongly across different asset classes. Hence, the
cryptocurrency strategies may comove with their corresponding counterparts in the equity
market as well. In this section, we present results controlling for the Fama-French three-
factor model. In the Appendix, we also present results based on the Carhart four-factor and
the Fama-French five-factor models. The results are qualitatively similar using any of the
stock market factor models.
Table 14 presents the results based on the Fama-French three-factor model. Overall,
the Fama-French three-factor model adjusted alphas of the strategies are quantitatively
similar to the unadjusted excess returns. For example, the adjusted alpha for the market
capitalization long-short strategy is -3.2 percent per week with a t-statistic of -2.372. The
unadjusted average excess returns of the long-short strategy is -3.4 percent per week with a
t-statistic of -2.557. The adjusted alpha for the three-week momentum long-short strategy
33
is 4.2 percent per week with a t-statistic of 2.799. The unadjusted average excess returns of
the long-short strategy is 4.1 percent per week with a t-statistic of 2.742.
5.4 Hedged Strategies
Recent empirical asset pricing literature has found that the common practice to create
factor-portfolios by sorting on characteristics associated with average returns captures both
priced and unpriced risks. Daniel et al. (2018) develop a method to hedge the unpriced
risks in the stock market using covariance information estimated from past returns. In this
section, weapplytheirmethodtoourfactorsandevaluatewhetherwecanfurtherstrengthen
the performance of our cryptocurrency factors.
We follow the procedure in Daniel et al. (2018) and provide an example based on the
cryptocurrency size factor. Detailed descriptions of the theoretical motivation and empirical
account can be found in Daniel et al. (2018). We first rank all cryptocurrencies by their
previous week market capitalization. Break-points are selected at the 30 percent and 70
percent marks. Then, all cryptocurrencies are assigned to one of the three bins. Next,
each of the three bins is further sorted into three equal bins based on the coins’ expected
covariances with the cryptocurrency size factor. Therefore, cryptocurrencies with similar
size but different loadings on size factor are assigned into different bins. We estimate the
expected covariance between coin returns and the size factor using the rolling past 365 days
of data. Finally, the hedge-portfolio for the cryptocurrency size factor is constructed as going
long on an equal-weighted portfolio of the low size-factor-loading portfolios and short on an
equal-weighted portfolio of the high size-factor-loading portfolios. We find that the hedge-
portfolio does not carry statistically significant return spreads for either the cryptocurrency
size strategy or momentum strategy, similar to findings in the stock market (See Daniel
and Titman, 1997). Therefore, the construction ensures that the hedge-portfolio captures
unpriced risks. We construct the cryptocurrency momentum hedge-portfolio in the same
way.
We use the squared Sharpe-ratio to evaluate the performance of the strategies. For the
cryptocurrency size factor, we find considerable gains from hedging the unpriced risks. The
squared weekly Sharpe-ratio goes from 0.057 for the unhedged strategy to 0.076 for the
hedged strategy when the hedge-portfolio is available. The gains are economically large.
However, for the cryptocurrency momentum factor, the adjustment does not increase the
squared Sharpe-ratio of the momentum strategy. One possibility for the lack of improvement
34
of the cryptocurrency momentum strategy is that the expected loadings on the momentum
factors change faster and are more transient than those on the size factors.
6 Conclusion
The results of this paper show that the cross-section of cryptocurrencies can be meaning-
fully analyzed using standard asset pricing tools. We document that, similar to other asset
classes (see, e.g., Asness et al., 2013), size and momentum factors are important in cap-
turing the cross-section of cryptocurrency returns. Moreover, a parsimonious three-factor
model that can be constructed using the market information is successful in pricing the
strategies in the cryptocurrency market. The paper thus establishes a set of stylized facts
on the cross-section of cryptocurrencies that can be used to assess and develop theoretical
models.
35
References
Abadi, J. and M. Brunnermeier (2018): “Blockchain economics,” Working Paper.
Amaya, D., P. Christoffersen, K. Jacobs, and A. Vasquez (2015): “Does realized
skewness predict the cross-section of equity returns?” Journal of Financial Economics,
118, 135–167.
Amihud, Y. (2002): “Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects,”
Journal of Financial Markets, 5, 31–56.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang(2006): “Thecross-sectionofvolatility
and expected returns,” The Journal of Finance, 61, 259–299.
Asness, C., A. Frazzini, R. Israel, T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen (2018):
“Size matters, if you control your junk,” Journal of Financial Economics.
Asness, C. S., T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen (2013): “Value and momentum
everywhere,” The Journal of Finance, 68, 929–985.
Bai, J., T. G. Bali, and Q. Wen (2018): “Common risk factors in the cross-section of
corporate bond returns,” Journal of Financial Economics.
Bali, T. G., N. Cakici, and R. F. Whitelaw (2011): “Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries
and the cross-section of expected returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 99, 427–446.
Banz, R. W. (1981): “The relationship between return and market value of common
stocks,” Journal of Financial Economics, 9, 3–18.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998): “A model of investor sentiment,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 49, 307–343.
Barberis, N. and R. Thaler (2003): “A survey of behavioral finance,” Handbook of the
Economics of Finance, 1, 1053–1128.
Barry, C. B. and S. J. Brown (1984): “Differential information and the small firm
effect,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13, 283–294.
Biais, B., C. Bisiere, M. Bouvard, and C. Casamatta (2018a): “The blockchain folk
theorem,” Working Paper.
Biais, B., C. Bisiere, M. Bouvard, C. Casamatta, and A. J. Menkveld (2018b):
“Equilibrium bitcoin pricing,” Working Paper.
Bianchi, D. (2017): “Cryptocurrencies as an asset class: An empirical assessment,” Work-
ing Paper.
36
Bianchi, D. and A. Dickerson (2018): “Trading volume in cryptocurrency markets,”
Working Paper.
Borri, N. (2018): “Conditional tail-risk in cryptocurrency markets,” Working Paper.
Borri, N. and K. Shakhnov (2018a): “The cross-section of cryptocurrency returns,”
Working Paper.
——— (2018b): “Cryptomarket discounts,” Working Paper.
Brennan, M. J., T. Chordia, and A. Subrahmanyam (1998): “Alternative factor
specifications, security characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 49, 345–373.
Carhart, M. M. (1997): “On persistence in mutual fund performance,” The Journal of
Finance, 52, 57–82.
Chen, A. and M. Velikov (2017): “Accounting for the anomaly zoo: A trading cost
perspective,” Working Paper.
Chen, A. Y. and T. Zimmermann (2018): “Publication bias and the cross-section of
stock returns,” Working Paper.
Chiu, J. and T. V. Koeppl (2017): “The economics of cryptocurrencies–bitcoin and
beyond,” Working Paper.
Chordia, T., A. Subrahmanyam, and V. R. Anshuman (2001): “Trading activity and
expected stock returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 59, 3–32.
Cong, L. W. and Z. He (2018): “Blockchain disruption and smart contracts,” Working
Paper.
Cong, L. W., Z. He, and J. Li (2018a): “Decentralized mining in centralized pools,”
Working Paper.
Cong, L. W., Y. Li, and N. Wang (2018b): “Tokenomics: Dynamic adoption and
valuation,” Working Paper.
Corbet, S., B. Lucey, and L. Yarovaya (2018a): “Datestamping the Bitcoin and
Ethereum bubbles,” Finance Research Letters, 26, 81–88.
Corbet, S., B. M. Lucey, A. Urquhart, and L. Yarovaya (2018b): “Cryptocurren-
cies as a financial asset: A systematic analysis,” Working Paper.
Corbet, S., A. Meegan, C. Larkin, B. Lucey, and L. Yarovaya(2018c): “Exploring
thedynamicrelationshipsbetweencryptocurrenciesandotherfinancialassets,” Economics
Letters, 165, 28–34.
37
Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam (1998): “Investor psychology and
security market under- and overreactions,” The Journal of Finance, 53, 1839–1885.
Daniel, K. and T. J. Moskowitz (2016): “Momentum crashes,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 122, 221–247.
Daniel, K., L. Mota, S. Rottke, and T. Santos (2018): “The cross-section of risk
and return,” Working Paper.
Daniel, K. and S. Titman (1997): “Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional
variation in stock returns,” The Journal of Finance, 52, 1–33.
——— (2006): “Market reactions to tangible and intangible information,” The Journal of
Finance, 61, 1605–1643.
De Bondt, W. F. and R. Thaler (1985): “Does the stock market overreact?” The
Journal of Finance, 40, 793–805.
Fama, E. F. (1965): “The behavior of stock-market prices,” The Journal of Business, 38,
34–105.
——— (1998): “Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 49, 283–306.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992): “The cross-section of expected stock returns,”
The Journal of Finance, 47, 427–465.
——— (1993): “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,” Journal of Fi-
nancial Economics, 33, 3–56.
——— (1995): “Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns,” The Journal of
Finance, 50, 131–155.
——— (1996): “Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies,” The Journal of Fi-
nance, 51, 55–84.
——— (2016a): “Choosing factors,” Working Paper.
——— (2016b): “Dissecting anomalies with a five-factor model,” Review of Financial Stud-
ies, 29, 69–103.
Fama, E. F. and J. D. MacBeth (1973): “Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical
tests,” Journal of Political Economy, 81, 607–636.
Feng, G., S. Giglio, and D. Xiu (2017): “Taming the factor zoo,” Working Paper.
George, T. J. and C.-Y. Hwang (2004): “The 52-week high and momentum investing,”
The Journal of Finance, 59, 2145–2176.
38
Gervais, S., R. Kaniel, and D. H. Mingelgrin (2001): “The high-volume return
premium,” The Journal of Finance, 56, 877–919.
Gilbert, S. and H. Loi (2018): “Digital currency risk,” International Journal of Eco-
nomics and Finance, 10, 108.
Herskovic, B., A. Moreira, and T. Muir (2018): “Hedging risk factors,” Working
Paper.
Hong, H., T. Lim, and J. C. Stein (2000): “Bad news travels slowly: Size, analyst
coverage, and the profitability of momentum strategies,” The Journal of Finance, 55,
265–295.
Hong, H. and J. C. Stein(1999): “Aunifiedtheoryofunderreaction, momentumtrading,
and overreaction in asset markets,” The Journal of Finance, 54, 2143–2184.
Hou, K., C. Xue, and L. Zhang(2015): “Digestinganomalies: Aninvestmentapproach,”
Review of Financial Studies, 28, 650–705.
Hu, A., C. A. Parlour, and U. Rajan (2018): “Cryptocurrencies: Stylized facts on a
new investible instrument,” Working Paper.
Hubrich, S. (2017): “’Know when to hodl ’em, know when to fodl ’em’: An investigation
of factor based investing in the cryptocurrency space,” Working Paper.
Jegadeesh, N. (1990): “Evidence of predictable behavior of security returns,” The Journal
of Finance, 45, 881–898.
Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman (1993): “Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
Implications for stock market efficiency,” The Journal of Finance, 48, 65–91.
——— (1995): “Overreaction, delayed reaction, and contrarian profits,” Review of Financial
Studies, 8, 973–993.
——— (2001): “Profitability of momentum strategies: An evaluation of alternative expla-
nations,” The Journal of Finance, 56, 699–720.
Li, J. and W. Mann (2018): “Initial coin offering and platform building,” Working Paper.
Li, J. and G. Yi (2018): “Toward a factor structure in crypto asset returns,” Working
Paper.
Liu, Y. and A. Tsyvinski (2018): “Risks and returns of cryptocurrency,” Working Paper.
Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2011): “Common risk factors in cur-
rency markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 3731–3777.
39
Makarov, I. and A. Schoar (2018): “Trading and arbitrage in cryptocurrency markets,”
Working Paper.
Moskowitz, T. J. and M. Grinblatt (1999): “Do industries explain momentum?” The
Journal of Finance, 54, 1249–1290.
Moskowitz, T. J., Y. H. Ooi, and L. H. Pedersen (2012): “Time series momentum,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 104, 228–250.
Novy-Marx, R. (2012): “Is momentum really momentum?” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, 103, 429–453.
Pagnotta, E. (2018): “Bitcoin as decentralized money: Prices, mining rewards, and net-
work security,” Mining Rewards, and Network Security.
Pagnotta, E. and A. Buraschi (2018): “An equilibrium valuation of bitcoin and decen-
tralized network assets,” Working Paper.
Routledge, B. and A. Zetlin-Jones (2018): “Currency stability using blockchain tech-
nology,” Working Paper.
Schilling, L. and H. Uhlig (2018): “Some simple bitcoin economics,” Working Paper.
Sockin, M. and W. Xiong (2018): “A model of cryptocurrencies,” Working Paper.
Stoffels, J. (2017): “Asset pricing of cryptocurrencies and momentum based patterns,”
Working Paper.
Szymanowska, M., F. De Roon, T. Nijman, and R. Van Den Goorbergh (2014):
“An anatomy of commodity futures risk premia,” The Journal of Finance, 69, 453–482.
Weber, W. E. (2016): “A Bitcoin standard: Lessons from the gold standard,” Working
Paper.
Yang, H. (2018): “Behavioral anomalies in cryptocurrency markets,” Working Paper.
Yermack, D. (2015): “Is Bitcoin a real currency? An economic appraisal,” in Handbook of
Digital Currency, Elsevier, 31–43.
40
Online Appendix
Table A.1: Summary Statistics of Factors
Panel A reports mean, median, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis of the cryptocurrency market
excess returns, the cryptocurrency size factor returns, and the cryptocurrency momentum factor returns.
Panel B reports the correlation matrix of the cryptocurrency market excess returns, the cryptocurrency size
factorreturns,thecryptocurrencymomentumfactorreturns,theBitcoinreturns,theEthereumreturns,and
the Ripple returns.
Panel A
Mean Median SD Skewness Kurtosis
Market Excess Return 0.013 0.005 0.117 0.292 4.574
Size Return 0.020 -0.005 0.143 3.067 19.616
Mom Return 0.038 0.034 0.184 0.791 7.868
Panel B
CMKT CSIZE CMOM Bitcoin Ethereum Ripple
Market Excess Return 1.000
Size Return 0.187 1.000
Mom Return -0.001 -0.033 1.000
Bitcoin Return 0.927 0.055 -0.030 1.000
Ethereum Return 0.531 0.146 -0.019 0.367 1.000
Ripple Return 0.549 0.268 0.022 0.376 0.289 1.000
Table A.2: Double Sort on Size and Momentum
This table shows results based on double sorting on both the size and momentum factors. Each coin is first
sorted into one of two size portfolios. Within each size portfolio, the coins are further sorted into one of five
momentum portfolios. *, **, *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Momentum
1 2 3 4 5 5-1
Low High
Low 0.032** 0.015 0.020* 0.015 0.039** 0.006
(2.05) (1.29) (1.72) (1.26) (2.05) (0.30)
Size
High -0.002 -0.00 0.018 0.019** 0.040** 0.042***
(-0.15) (-0.01) (1.60) (1.98) (2.48) (2.57)
41
Table A.3: Carhart Four-Factor
R −R =αi +βi MKT +βi SMB+βi HML+βi MOM+(cid:15) (6)
i f MKT SMB HML MOM i
where MKT is the excess stock market returns, SMB is the Fama-French size factor, HML is the Fama-
French value factor, and MOM is the momentum factor. The formation of the quintile portfolios for the
nine significant strategies are discussed in Section 3. *, **, *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%,
and 1%. m.a.e and R¯2 are the mean of the absolute pricing errors and the average R2 of the five portfolios.
1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.043*** 0.017 0.012 0.012 0.012 -0.031**
βMKT 0.937 0.998 0.333 0.672 0.400 -0.536
βSMB -0.177 -0.941 0.159 -0.322 -0.689 -0.512
MCAP 0.019 0.008
βHML -1.023 0.667 -0.326 -0.365 -0.244 0.779
βMOM 0.607 0.126 0.175 0.449 -0.036 -0.643
R2 0.009 0.013 0.003 0.010 0.007 0.009
α 0.049** 0.027** 0.000 0.017 0.011 -0.038**
βMKT 1.210 0.522 0.637 1.112 0.410 -0.800
βSMB -1.364 -1.483 -0.383 -0.857 -0.571 0.792
PRC 0.021 0.008
βHML -1.392 0.485 -0.335 1.008 -0.067 1.325
βMOM -0.351 0.144 0.096 -0.104 0.103 0.454
R2 0.009 0.008 0.005 0.014 0.006 0.006
α 0.050*** 0.024* 0.000 0.020 0.011 -0.039**
βMKT 1.157 0.515 0.631 1.077 0.409 -0.748
βSMB -1.601 -1.169 -0.346 -0.690 -0.571 1.030
MAXDPRC 0.021 0.008
βHML -1.319 0.373 -0.148 0.913 -0.064 1.255
βMOM -0.183 0.128 0.176 -0.276 0.107 0.290
R2 0.009 0.005 0.005 0.013 0.006 0.006
α -0.009 -0.003 0.008 0.042** 0.021 0.029**
βMKT 0.927 0.467 0.408 1.604 -0.337 -1.265*
βSMB 0.298 -1.348 -0.711 1.178 -1.866 -2.165*
r 1,0 0.017 0.017
βHML -0.613 -0.406 -0.319 2.816 -0.376 0.237
βMOM 1.265* -0.041 0.320 0.032 0.343 -0.922
R2 0.028 0.011 0.007 0.026 0.014 0.031
α -0.005 0.005 0.009 0.017* 0.029** 0.034**
βMKT 0.979 0.329 -0.064 0.270 -0.121 -1.100
βSMB 0.053 0.239 -1.153 -1.163 -1.826 -1.879
r 2,0 0.013 0.013
βHML -0.186 -0.337 -0.854 0.823 -0.807 -0.620
βMOM 0.967 -0.345 -0.347 0.658 0.539 -0.428
R2 0.018 0.004 0.012 0.014 0.017 0.022
42
TableA.3Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.001 0.001 0.014 0.018* 0.042*** 0.041***
βMKT 0.494 0.082 0.596 0.952* -0.636 -1.130
βSMB 1.309 -0.391 -0.514 -0.798 -1.610 -2.920**
r 3,0 0.015 0.012
βHML -0.193 -0.578 -0.230 0.537 0.611 0.804
βMOM 0.455 -0.095 -0.152 0.468 1.277 0.823
R2 0.013 0.002 0.005 0.016 0.022 0.041
α 0.002 0.002 0.007 0.017* 0.026* 0.024*
βMKT 0.264 0.738 0.304 0.718 -0.426 -0.690
βSMB 0.713 -0.028 -0.895 -0.976 -1.556 -2.270**
r 4,0 0.011 0.011
βHML 0.253 -0.148 0.264 -0.335 -1.054 -1.307
βMOM 0.453 0.212 -0.230 0.005 0.981 0.529
R2 0.005 0.007 0.008 0.010 0.025 0.038
α 0.049** 0.027** 0.000 0.017 0.011 -0.038**
βMKT 1.210 0.522 0.637 1.112 0.410 -0.800
βSMB -1.364 -1.483 -0.383 -0.857 -0.571 0.792
PRCVOL 0.021 0.008
βHML -1.392 0.485 -0.335 1.008 -0.067 1.325
βMOM -0.351 0.144 0.096 -0.104 0.103 0.454
R2 0.009 0.008 0.005 0.014 0.006 0.006
α 0.040** 0.029* 0.019 0.019 0.012 -0.028**
βMKT 1.380 1.305 0.873 0.796 0.389 -0.992
βSMB -1.129 -1.608 -1.170 -0.054 -0.686 0.443
STDPRCVOL 0.024 0.009
βHML -0.139 -0.818 -0.772 -0.053 -0.246 -0.107
βMOM 0.612 -0.137 -0.170 0.590 -0.042 -0.654
R2 0.011 0.013 0.010 0.006 0.007 0.008
43
Table A.4: Fame-French Five-Factor
R −R =αi +βi MKT +βi SMB+βi HML+βi RMW +βi CMA+(cid:15) (7)
i f MKT SMB HML RMW CMA i
whereMKT istheexcessstockmarketreturns,SMBistheFama-Frenchsizefactor,HMListheFama-French
value factor, and RMW is the Fama French profitability factor, and CMA is the Fama French investment
factor. The formation of the quintile portfolios for the nine significant strategies are discussed in Section 3.
*, **, *** denote significance levels at the 10%, 5%, and 1%. m.a.e and
R¯2
are the mean of the absolute
pricing errors and the average R2 of the five portfolios.
1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α 0.045*** 0.017 0.013 0.013 0.012 -0.033**
βMKT 0.903 0.762 0.164 0.555 0.357 -0.546
βSMB -0.554 -1.326 0.001 -0.747 -0.743 -0.188
MCAP βHML -1.992 0.716 -0.143 -1.020 -0.163 1.829 0.020 0.011
βRMW -1.147 -1.932 -0.744 -1.636 -0.341 0.806
βCMA 1.789 -0.129 -0.723 1.243 -0.123 -1.912
R2 0.010 0.018 0.004 0.015 0.007 0.009
α 0.049** 0.028** 0.001 0.017 0.011 -0.038**
βMKT 1.395 0.368 0.758 1.240 0.305 -1.090
βSMB -1.593 -1.813 -0.619 -0.766 -0.614 0.980
PRC βHML -2.178 0.335 -1.227 0.800 0.145 2.322 0.021 0.011
βRMW -1.231 -1.561 -0.853 0.461 -0.206 1.025
βCMA 2.935 0.352 2.416 0.705 -0.742 -3.676
R2 0.012 0.010 0.011 0.015 0.007 0.012
α 0.051*** 0.025* 0.001 0.020 0.011 -0.040**
βMKT 1.386 0.328 0.670 1.240 0.304 -1.082
βSMB -1.856 -1.503 -0.669 -0.548 -0.614 1.242
MAXDPRC βHML -2.419 0.343 -0.964 0.793 0.146 2.565 0.022 0.010
βRMW -1.119 -1.635 -1.271 0.553 -0.209 0.910
βCMA 3.506 0.050 2.119 0.744 -0.745 -4.251
R2 0.013 0.008 0.011 0.013 0.007 0.013
α -0.008 -0.003 0.008 0.041** 0.022 0.029**
βMKT 0.701 0.530 0.344 2.065* -0.548 -1.249
βSMB -0.135 -1.344 -0.790 1.675 -2.363* -2.228*
r 1,0 βHML -1.484 -0.587 -0.466 2.075 -0.759 0.724 0.016 0.017
βRMW -0.924 0.048 -0.098 2.879 -2.189 -1.265
βCMA 0.359 0.570 -0.130 1.676 0.732 0.373
R2 0.017 0.011 0.006 0.031 0.018 0.029
44
TableA.4Continued 1 2 3 4 5 5-1 m.a.e R¯2
α -0.004 0.005 0.008 0.017* 0.030** 0.034**
βMKT 0.632 0.282 0.057 0.341 -0.336 -0.968
βSMB -0.324 0.012 -0.991 -0.926 -2.365* -2.041
r 2,0 βHML -0.334 -0.327 -0.741 0.525 -1.386 -1.053 0.013 0.014
βRMW -1.122 -1.482 0.525 1.889 -2.180 -1.058
βCMA -1.120 0.736 0.221 -0.520 0.940 2.061
R2 0.014 0.007 0.011 0.017 0.020 0.025
α 0.002 0.001 0.013 0.018* 0.044*** 0.042***
βMKT 0.304 0.106 0.563 0.916 -0.695 -0.999
βSMB 0.901 -0.478 -0.378 -0.723 -2.170 -3.071**
r 3,0 βHML -0.572 -0.746 0.229 0.459 -1.060 -0.488 0.016 0.012
βRMW -1.632 -0.479 0.434 0.810 -1.306 0.326
βCMA 0.464 0.685 -1.066 -0.682 2.614 2.149
R2 0.015 0.003 0.007 0.016 0.020 0.040
α 0.002 0.003 0.007 0.017* 0.027** 0.025**
βMKT 0.181 0.671 0.317 0.720 -0.259 -0.439
βSMB 0.602 -0.228 -0.801 -0.818 -1.813 -2.415**
r 4,0 βHML 0.024 -0.414 0.541 -0.070 -2.770* -2.794** 0.011 0.011
βRMW -0.130 -0.780 0.206 0.743 0.049 0.179
βCMA -0.125 0.467 -0.402 -0.832 3.088 3.213
R2 0.003 0.008 0.008 0.012 0.026 0.043
α 0.043** 0.028** 0.014 0.017 0.012 -0.031*
βMKT 1.450 0.719 1.156 0.886 0.327 -1.123
βSMB -2.261 -1.451 -0.652 -0.139 -0.749 1.512
PRCVOL βHML -0.891 -1.677 -0.344 -1.923 -0.130 0.761 0.023 0.014
βRMW -3.382 -2.623 0.874 0.263 -0.411 2.971
βCMA 1.306 2.596 0.565 3.908* -0.235 -1.541
R2 0.018 0.018 0.011 0.014 0.007 0.015
α 0.041** 0.031** 0.018 0.021 0.012 -0.030**
βMKT 1.176 1.124 1.160 0.873 0.333 -0.843
βSMB -1.662 -2.271 -1.038 -0.484 -0.744 0.918
STDPRCVOL βHML -0.798 -1.250 -1.406 -1.477 -0.126 0.672 0.025 0.014
βRMW -2.065 -3.442 0.767 -1.279 -0.379 1.687
βCMA 1.021 1.836 1.972 3.101 -0.221 -1.242
R2 0.013 0.023 0.013 0.012 0.007 0.010
45
Table A.5: Crypto Factor – Tercile
CMKT is the cryptocurrency excess market returns, CSMB is the cryptocurrency size factor, and CMOM
is the cryptocurrency momentum factor. The formation of the quintile portfolios for the nine significant
strategies are discussed in Section 3. The t-statistics are reported in the parentheses. *, **, *** denote
significance level at the 10%, 5%, and 1%.
Cons t CMKT t CSMB t CMOM t R2
Mean -0.015* (-1.810)
MCAP C-1 -0.013 (-1.633) -0.121* (-1.741) 0.012
C-3 0.004** (1.970) -0.006 (-0.369) -0.893*** (-72.831) -0.004 (-0.429) 0.994
Mean -0.027** (-2.080)
PRC C-1 -0.022* (-1.721) -0.441*** (-4.094) 0.062
C-3 -0.010 (-0.815) -0.365*** (-3.621) -0.544*** (-6.630) -0.047 (-0.738) 0.201
Mean -0.027** (-2.099)
MAXDPRC C-1 -0.022* (-1.741) -0.436*** (-4.070) 0.061
C-3 -0.010 (-0.819) -0.359*** (-3.589) -0.545*** (-6.685) -0.051 (-0.807) 0.203
Mean 0.041*** (3.719)
r1,0 C-1 0.041*** (3.633) 0.060 (0.628) 0.002
C-3 0.021** (2.072) -0.019 (-0.219) 0.127* (1.852) 0.479*** (8.947) 0.246
Mean 0.029*** (2.698)
r2,0 C-1 0.030*** (2.997) 0.168** (1.978) 0.015
C-3 0.007 (1.031) 0.089 (1.484) -0.014 (-0.286) 0.618*** (16.236) 0.519
Mean 0.031*** (2.836)
r3,0 C-1 0.030*** (2.696) 0.120 (1.287) 0.006
C-3 -0.003 (-0.828) 0.005 (0.147) -0.009 (-0.346) 0.897*** (44.227) 0.886
Mean 0.027** (2.518)
r4,0 C-1 0.025** (2.340) 0.157* (1.742) 0.012
C-3 0.000 (0.029) 0.073 (1.218) -0.046 (-0.943) 0.692*** (18.278) 0.576
Mean -0.020* (-1.686)
PRCVOL C-1 -0.017 (-1.408) -0.300*** (-2.920) 0.032
C-3 0.002 (0.231) -0.181** (-2.184) -0.805*** (-11.921) -0.113** (-2.153) 0.385
Mean -0.021* (-1.764)
STDPRCVOL C-1 -0.018 (-1.494) -0.284*** (-2.845) 0.031
C-3 0.001 (0.820) 0.998*** (171.436) -0.006 (-1.170) -0.002 (-0.588) 0.992
46

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/indurp15-e-done.pdf
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
Report of the Standing Committee on Industry and
Technology
Joël Lightbound, Chair
JUNE 2023
44th PARLIAMENT, 1st SESSION
Published under the authority of the Speaker of the House of Commons
SPEAKER’S PERMISSION
The proceedings of the House of Commons and its Committees are hereby made available to provide greater public access. The
parliamentary privilege of the House of Commons to control the publication and broadcast of the proceedings of the House of
Commons and its Committees is nonetheless reserved. All copyrights therein are also reserved.
Reproduction of the proceedings of the House of Commons and its Committees, in whole or in part and in any medium, is
hereby permitted provided that the reproduction is accurate and is not presented as official. This permission does not extend
to reproduction, distribution or use for commercial purpose of financial gain. Reproduction or use outside this permission or
without authorization may be treated as copyright infringement in accordance with the Copyright Act. Authorization may be
obtained on written application to the Office of the Speaker of the House of Commons.
Reproduction in accordance with this permission does not constitute publication under the authority of the House of
Commons. The absolute privilege that applies to the proceedings of the House of Commons does not extend to these permitted
reproductions. Where a reproduction includes briefs to a Standing Committee of the House of Commons, authorization for
reproduction may be required from the authors in accordance with the Copyright Act.
Nothing in this permission abrogates or derogates from the privileges, powers, immunities and rights of the House of Commons
and its Committees. For greater certainty, this permission does not affect the prohibition against impeaching or questioning the
proceedings of the House of Commons in courts or otherwise. The House of Commons retains the right and privilege to find
users in contempt of Parliament if a reproduction or use is not in accordance with this permission.
Also available on the House of Commons website
at the following address: www.ourcommons.ca
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
Report of the Standing Committee on
Industry and Technology
Joël Lightbound
Chair
JUNE 2023
44th PARLIAMENT, 1st SESSION
NOTICE TO READER
Reports from committees presented to the House of Commons
Presenting a report to the House is the way a committee makes public its findings and recommendations
on a particular topic. Substantive reports on a subject-matter study usually contain a synopsis of the
testimony heard, the recommendations made by the committee, as well as the reasons for those
recommendations.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INDUSTRY AND
TECHNOLOGY
CHAIR
Joël Lightbound
VICE-CHAIRS
Rick Perkins
Sébastien Lemire
MEMBERS
Nathaniel Erskine-Smith
Andy Fillmore
Iqwinder Gaheer
Bernard Généreux
Viviane Lapointe
Brian Masse
Tony Van Bynen
Brad Vis
Ryan Williams
OTHER MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT WHO PARTICIPATED
Richard Cannings
Han Dong
Earl Dreeshen
Stephen Ellis
Hon. Ed Fast
Peter Fragiskatos
Anthony Housefather
Mike Kelloway
Ben Lobb
Wayne Long
Tim Louis
iii
Ron McKinnon
Hon. Michelle Rempel Garner
Brenda Shanahan
Terry Sheehan
Gabriel Ste-Marie
Denis Trudel
Rechie Valdez
CLERKS OF THE COMMITTEE
Miriam Burke
Michael MacPherson
LIBRARY OF PARLIAMENT
Parliamentary Information, Education and Research Services
Sarah Lemelin-Bellerose, Analyst
Scott McTaggart, Analyst
iv
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY
has the honour to present its
FIFTEENTH REPORT
Pursuant to its mandate under Standing Order 108(2), the committee has studied blockchain
technology, and has agreed to report the following:
v
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................................... 1
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY: CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND .................................. 5
Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 5
Blockchain Technology and Cryptocurrencies Explained ............................................... 6
The Characteristics of Blockchain Networks .............................................................. 11
Blockchain Applications ............................................................................................................. 12
Non-Cryptocurrency Applications .................................................................................. 13
Public Sector Applications .......................................................................................... 16
Financial Blockchain Applications .................................................................................. 16
Blockchain in Canada .................................................................................................................. 18
Blockchain’s Economic Impact in Canada .................................................................... 19
The Blockchain Ecosystem ................................................................................................ 21
The State of Blockchain Regulation in Canada ........................................................... 22
Cryptocurrency Trading Platforms ................................................................................ 24
Cryptocurrency Mining Firms .......................................................................................... 26
Current Challenges ....................................................................................................................... 28
Fraud Committed by Cryptocurrency Companies .................................................... 28
Other Cryptocurrency-related Crime ............................................................................ 29
Cryptocurrency Volatility ................................................................................................... 31
Ways Governments Can Support Blockchain .................................................................... 32
Regulatory Clarity ................................................................................................................. 32
Engagement on a National Strategy ............................................................................... 34
Stablecoins ............................................................................................................................... 35
Taxation Issues ....................................................................................................................... 36
Access to Banking and Insurance Services .................................................................. 37
Diversity and Inclusion ....................................................................................................... 38
vii
Research and Education ..................................................................................................... 38
Talent Development and Retention ............................................................................... 39
Observations and Recommendations ................................................................................... 40
APPENDIX A LIST OF WITNESSES ................................................................................................ 45
APPENDIX B LIST OF BRIEFS .......................................................................................................... 49
REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT RESPONSE ................................................................................ 51
viii
LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS
As a result of their deliberations committees may make recommendations which they
include in their reports for the consideration of the House of Commons or the Government.
Recommendations related to this study are listed below.
Recommendation 1
That the Government of Canada recognize blockchain as an emerging industry
in Canada, with significant long-term economic and job creation opportunities. ....... 40
Recommendation 2
That the government of Canada should, in its efforts to improve consumer
protection and regulatory clarity to the emerging and innovative field of digital
assets, be guided by the principle that individuals’ right to self custody should
be protected and that ease of access to safe and reliable on and off ramps
should be defended and promoted. .......................................................................... 41
Recommendation 3
That the Government of Canada, following consultation with the provinces and
stakeholders, establish a national blockchain strategy that clarifies the
government’s policy direction and regulatory approach, and demonstrates
support for the industry. .......................................................................................... 41
Recommendation 4
That the Government of Canada, with a view to adopting a national blockchain
and distributed ledger strategy:
• call on a group of experts, entrepreneurs, academics and investors, as
well as people in the artificial intelligence industry cluster, to support its
analysis and understanding and help it determine best steps;
• give the group a mandate to:
• set up a platform for information exchange and monitoring;
• carry out analyses to identify the most promising or high-risk areas
for disruption;
• advise the government on promising initiatives; and
• support the government in implementing selected initiatives. ................. 41
Recommendation 5
That the Government of Canada pursue opportunities for international
cooperation in the development of blockchain regulations and policies,
including with our major trading partners. ................................................................ 42
Recommendation 6
That the Government of Canada conduct innovative pilot projects using
distributed ledgers to help strengthen the ecosystem and recognize up-and-
coming businesses. ................................................................................................... 42
Recommendation 7
That the Government of Canada create a sandbox where entrepreneurs can
test technologies unhindered by as yet unadopted regulations. ................................ 42
Recommendation 8
That the Government of Canada adopt a distinct regulatory approach to
stablecoins that reflects the difference between these products and other
cryptocurrencies, and account for the unique regulatory challenges
they present. ............................................................................................................ 42
Recommendation 9
That the Government of Canada adopt regulatory changes to promote the
establishment of federally regulated cryptocurrency custodians to meet the
demand for cold storage services from Canadian cryptocurrency firms. .................... 42
Recommendation 10
That the Government of Canada adopt measures for access to banking and
insurance services for blockchain firms, including through Crown corporations. ........ 43
2
Recommendation 11
That the Government of Canada establish a public awareness campaign, in
consultation with the provinces and the industry, to educate the public about
risks related to cryptocurrencies and the benefits of accessing cryptocurrency
markets through regulated Canadian entities. .......................................................... 43
Recommendation 12
That the Government of Canada draw on the previous report on SMEs and
launch a strategic initiative to develop skills and talent and support research. .......... 43
Recommendation 13
That the Government of Canada investigate ways to promote the adoption of
blockchain technology in supply chains. .................................................................... 44
Recommendation 14
That the Government of Canada, in collaboration with the Commissioner of
Canada Elections, undertake a study on the new opportunities this technology
presents for electronic voting, consultation, and the modernization of our
democratic institutions. ............................................................................................ 44
Recommendation 15
That the government of Canada should investigate equity between provinces
in the application of the Excise Tax Act to mining activities to ensure fair
taxation. .................................................................................................................. 44
Recommendation 16
That the government of Canada, in order to foster a competitive digital asset
mining environment and in order to continue to attract investments, should
maintain that digital asset mining constitutes a commercial activity in Canada;
and as such adopt a neutral and equitable position towards this new and
growing industry. ..................................................................................................... 44
3
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
INTRODUCTION
On 26 September 2022, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Industry and
Technology (the Committee) passed a motion to:
recognize that blockchain technology—a virtual ledger able to register
transparently great volumes of transactions—is an emerging technology
with vast potential to bring about innovation and efficiency gains in
different industries such as financial services, health care, travel,
entertainment, agriculture and many more sectors of our economy; that
blockchain startups have seen an impressive growth in the last years; that
regulatory certainty could bring about more investments in that specific
field and drive innovation across the Canadian economy; that as such,
pursuant to standing order 108(2), the Committee undertake a
comprehensive study on the current state of blockchain technology in
Canada, and potential applications, to determine the innovative
opportunities it presents as well as the risks, alongside the legal and
regulatory framework required to govern this emerging technology; that
the Committee devote a minimum of four meetings to this study and
report its findings to the House.1
Over the course of the study, the Committee held 5 meetings during which it heard
from 31 witnesses. The Committee also received 6 briefs.
During its study, witnesses told the Committee about the ways that blockchain
technology is already changing the digital landscape and providing significant economic
benefits, while also expressing optimism that greater opportunities using the technology
lie ahead. Much of this discussion focused on cryptocurrencies, like Bitcoin, whose
framework is based on blockchain technology, but witnesses emphasized that this
technology has use cases across industries and sectors.
1 House of Commons, Standing Committee on Industry and Technology [INDU], Minutes, Meeting No. 34,
26 September 2022.
5
Despite this promise, the blockchain industry is also facing many challenges. While
allegations of massive fraud and the collapse large cryptocurrency firms have been the
subject of media attention in recent years, witnesses also spoke about the threat of
smaller-scale crimes perpetrated against consumers seeking to enter cryptocurrency
markets. At the same time, concerns have increased regarding the energy resources
consumed by the blockchain industry, and its potential negative impact on strained
energy grids and the transition to a green economy.
Witnesses recognized that the recent history of blockchain has demonstrated the need
for better regulation, including protection for consumers from fraud and other
malfeasance. While many emphasized Canada’s strong regulatory safeguards, such as
provincial securities regulation and federal anti-money laundering and anti-terrorism
financing obligations, witnesses stated that governments need to partner with industry
to better understand this rapidly evolving sector and enact regulations that protect
consumers without unnecessarily hindering innovation.
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY AND CRYPTOCURRENCIES EXPLAINED
In public discourse, blockchain and cryptocurrency, which both originated from a 2008
paper attributed to Satoshi Nakamoto, are often confused or used interchangeably.2
Blockchain, however, refers to a type of distributed ledger, or database, technology
where every member, or node, of a network possess a copy of the ledger and can
participate in maintaining it. Blockchain uses cryptography and what are known as
consensus mechanisms to validate new information which is added to the ledger and
ensure that the ledger is secure from tampering.
In a blockchain network, blocks of encrypted information are added to the database
once they have been validated by the nodes in the network using an algorithmic
consensus mechanism. The cryptography used for each block is linked to the preceding
block in a chain, impeding the ability of a node to retroactively alter the information
contained in the preceding blocks.3
Blockchain networks provide a means for ensuring the integrity of the information
contained in a database without requiring a central authority to validate its authenticity.
Instead, nodes in a blockchain network are collectively responsible for maintaining the
2 Satoshi Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, 2008.
3 The World Bank, Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) and Blockchain, FinTech Note, No. 1, 2017.
6
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
integrity of the information, creating a decentralized authority that promotes the secure
recording and storage of information.
Blockchain networks, and other forms of distributed ledger technology, can be broadly
categorized into networks that are open/permissionless and private/permissioned.4
Open/permissionless networks allow any user to join as a node and then propose
changes to the database and participate in validation. Open/permissionless include the
most well-known blockchain networks, including the Bitcoin and Ethereum networks.
Private/permissioned networks require that users be authorized before becoming a
node and the ability to propose or validate changes to the database may be further
restricted to certain nodes in the network.
4 Adriane Yong, Beyond Digital Currencies: Blockchain in the Public Sector.
7
Figure 1—Types of Digital Ledgers
Source: Adriane Yong, “Beyond Digital Currencies: Blockchain in the Public Sector,” HillNotes,
23 April, 2019.
8
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
The original, and still most commonly associated, usage of blockchain technology is as a
ledger for crypto assets, including cryptocurrencies. Proposed legislation in Ontario
defines a crypto asset as “a digital representation of value or contractual rights, which
may be transferred and stored electronically, using distributed ledger or similar
technology.”5 While Merriam-Webster dictionary defines cryptocurrency as “any form of
currency that only exists digitally, that usually has no central issuing or regulating
authority but instead uses a decentralized system to record transactions and manage the
issuance of new units, and that relies on cryptography to prevent counterfeiting and
fraudulent transactions.”6
Though each cryptocurrency blockchain operates according to its own protocols, most
are modelled, at least to some extent, on the Bitcoin blockchain network, the first and
largest cryptocurrency by market capitalization.7 With the proper software installed, any
computer user can join the Bitcoin network, engage in bitcoin transactions, and
participate in validation of the ledger.8 The software provides users with a matching set
of cryptographic keys, commonly referred to as a wallet: one public, which is used to
identify the user on the ledger and track their bitcoin transactions, and one private,
which allows users to sign transactions to ensure only they may transfer the bitcoin
attributed to them. The Bitcoin ledger keeps a complete record of transactions, allowing
users to track the chain of ownership of bitcoins.
5 Ontario Regulatory Register, Capital Markets Act - Consultation Draft, 12 October 2021.
6 Merriam-Webster, cryptocurrency.
7 CoinMarketCap, Today’s Cryptocurrency Prices by Market Cap; Rainer Böhme et al., “Bitcoin: Economics,
Technology, and Governance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 29, No. 2, Spring 2015.
8 Bitcoin.org, Bitcoin Core.
9
Figure 2—Public Key Cryptography, Digital Signatures and Chain of
Ownership
Source: Satoshi Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System, 31 October 2008.
The Bitcoin network uses a consensus method known as proof of work. Under proof of
work, nodes in the network compete to solve a computational problem, with the node
finding the solution first winning the right to validate the next block (containing the
record of recent bitcoin transactions) to be added to the chain. Nodes that validate a
block are rewarded with newly minted bitcoin, in what is referred to as bitcoin, or
cryptocurrency, mining. The Bitcoin network is calibrated to validate a new block
approximately every ten minutes, with the difficulty of computational problems
increasing as nodes devote greater computational power to solving proof of
work problems.9
One alternative to proof of work as a consensus mechanism in cryptocurrency
blockchain networks is proof of stake. Under proof of stake, nodes must commit, or
stake, cryptocurrency instead of dedicating computational power, as in proof of work, in
order to have the opportunity to validate a new block and add it to the chain. Nodes
participating in validation are rewarded with cryptocurrency, like with proof of work, but
may also be penalized for bad behaviour through penalties levied against the
9 Rainer Böhme et al., “Bitcoin: Economics, Technology, and Governance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Vol. 29, No. 2, Spring 2015.
10
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
cryptocurrency they have staked.10 Ethereum, the second largest cryptocurrency by
market capitalization, completed its transition from proof of work to proof of stake in
September 2022.11
Blockchain technology and related cryptocurrency networks are part of a broader
evolution in digital technology called Web 3. Web 3 refers to the emerging third phase of
the internet that incorporates blockchain as well as other technologies like artificial
intelligence and the internet of things. This third phase of the internet is differentiated
from the first phase, which ran through the early 2000s and was characterized largely by
the consumption of information, and the second phase, which beginning in the 2000s
was dominated by social media and characterized by both the consumption and creation
of information. Instead, Web 3 is characterized by the ability to consume, create, and
own information and supports “online privacy, self-sovereign identity, and property
rights to digital assets.”12
The Characteristics of Blockchain Networks
In a 2019 white paper, the Digital Governance Institute identified four key characteristics
of blockchain networks:
• Transparency: Blockchain networks are an “open book”, generally
providing each node with a complete copy of the network’s database.
• Traceability: The chronological recording of transactions allows users to
track the chain of ownership of assets recorded in the database.
• Immutability: The distributed nature of blockchain databases means that
information is permanently registered and resistant to tampering.
• Disintermediation and user empowerment: blockchain networks allow
for peer-to-peer transactions without the oversight of a central authority
10 Ethereum, PROOF-OF-STAKE (POS); Vitalik Buterin, “A Proof of Stake Design Philosophy,” Medium,
30 December 2016.
11 CoinMarketCap, Today’s Cryptocurrency Prices by Market Cap; Ethereum, The Merge.
12 Douglas Heintzman and Irving Wladawsky-Berger, “What is Web 3?,” Research Brief, Blockchain Research
Institute, 28 September 2022.
11
or intermediary. Responsibility for management of the database is
collectivised.13
Table 1 sets out the strengths and weakness of blockchain networks compared to other
forms of information storage, such as centralized databases and cloud storage, as
identified by the Digital Governance Institute.
Table 1—Strengths and Weakness of Blockchain Networks
Strengths Weaknesses
• Data decentralization (copies of nodes on a • Energy consumption (some networks only)
distributed network)
• Limited blockchain performance
• Immutability of information
• Transaction fees (some networks only)
• Transparency of transactions
• Lack of standards and interoperability
• Secure environment (advanced between blockchains
cryptography, distributed network)
• Maturity of the technology
• Proven business solutions
• Legal and regulatory frameworks in
(cryptocurrencies)
development
• High fault tolerance
• Complexity of protocol modification
• Open and open-source software mechanisms
• Transparency and understandability of the
network
• Potential cost reduction
Source: Digital Governance Institute, “Registres Distribués, L’Évolution de la Chaîne de Blocs : Impacts,
enjeux et potentiels pour le Québec,” White Paper, November 2019.
BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS
Witnesses presented the Committee with a range of real and potential applications of
blockchain technology, which can be broadly grouped into those related to
cryptocurrencies, and those intended for other sectors. Several witnesses also cautioned
against assuming that the blockchain applications identified today will ultimately prove
the most valuable. According to Brian Mosoff, Chief Executive Officer, President of
Canadian Web3 Council, Ether Capital, “It's really hard to imagine what the biggest
businesses will be in this new world. There are probably things that are more digitally
13 Digital Governance Institute, “Registres Distribués, L’Évolution de la Chaîne de Blocs : Impacts, enjeux et
potentiels pour le Québec,” White paper, November 2019 [AVAILABLE IN FRENCH ONLY].
12
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
native or blockchain-native than something that we can mirror back to society today.”14
Jean Amiouny, Co-founder and Chief Executive Officer, Shakepay Inc., made a similar
comment, comparing the current state of blockchain to the early days of the internet:
[A]ny new technology is never well understood, and it takes time for society to
experience its benefits. The Internet in the 1980s was an incredible innovation, but it
took time for it to mature and develop into what it is today.15
Witnesses emphasized that there are a broad range of crypto assets created using
blockchain technology. As Laure Fouin, Co-Chair Digital Assets and Blockchain, Osler,
Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, explained, crypto assets can be organized into categories:
The first category is cryptocurrencies …The second category is cyber-indexed tokens,
which include non-fungible tokens—in other words, digital assets that represent real
objects such as art, music and videos—tokens that refer to currency or currencies,
commodities or other digital assets, and the so-called tokens representing rights, such
as investors' rights in a joint venture, which are then securities… The third category is
utility tokens, which have a specific purpose. For example, they may be used in the
future on a platform in exchange for a special service or to receive preferential
treatment for certain services on that platform.16
Non-Cryptocurrency Applications
Morgan Hayduk, Co-Chief Executive Officer, Beatdapp Software Inc., testified that his
company is one of “a growing class of companies that leverage blockchain technology for
non-financial or non-speculative reasons.”17 In general, witnesses emphasized how the
secure, transparent and decentralized nature of blockchain networks could promote the
efficient recording, transmitting and storing of information across industries.
Namir Anani, President and Chief Executive Officer, Information and Communications
Technology Council, said that blockchain offered “solutions to improve business value
chains, enhance efficiencies and enable a system of trust based on consensus, while
unlocking at the same time further economic activities without the need for a trusted
14 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1135 (Brian Mosoff, Chief Executive
Officer, President of Canadian Web3 Council, Ether Capital).
15 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1600 (Jean Amiouny, Co-founder and
Chief Executive Officer, Shakepay Inc.).
16 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1605 (Laure Fouin, Co-Chair Digital Assets
and Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, As an Individual).
17 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1535 (Morgan Hayduk, Co-Chief Executive
Officer, Beatdapp Software Inc.).
13
third party intermediary.”18 According to Jesse McWaters, Senior Vice President, Global
Head of Regulatory Advocacy, Mastercard, blockchain has “the potential to transform
how information is shared and how value gets moved.”19
Witnesses spoke about how blockchain could make supply chains more efficient,
transparent and responsive. Charlaine Bouchard, Research Chair in Smart Contracts and
Blockchain, Digital Governance Institute, testified that applying blockchain technology to
supply chains will “protect data and streamline processes, in addition to decreasing
resource waste and abuses.”20 According to Patrick Mandic, Chief Executive Officer,
Mavennet Systems Inc., supply chains are “still largely paper-based” or using “near-
paper formats like PDFs or emails,” as organizations, each using their own digital
systems, do not “speak the same digital language.” Therefore, once supply chains pass
organizational boundaries “digitalization simply goes out of the window.”21
Through blockchain networks that are interoperable across organizations, Patrick Mandic
believed that it would be possible to:
create supply chains that can adapt to supply chain shocks in real time. It means the
ability to automate contract settlement and payments, the ability to enable automatic
trade finance, the ability to identify the origin of products in their composition, being
able to prove the environmental footprint of a product to enable buyers’ conscious
decisions on what products they’re buying.22
According to witnesses, blockchain-enabled supply chains could improve outcomes
across numerous industries. Koleya Karringten, Executive Director, Canadian Blockchain
Consortium, pointed to pharmaceutical provenance and food security as issues that
could be addressed by blockchain-enabled supply chains. Such supply chains could help
reduce the “four billion incorrectly labelled or fake drugs [that] are administered each
year” by allowing doctors and pharmacists to “verify the authenticity of the
pharmaceuticals they administer and even get real-time alerts directly from
manufacturers for when medications expire or become available.” In the food industry,
blockchain could “cut food recall times down from days to seconds” enabling food
18 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1615 (Namir Anani, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Information and Communications Technology Council).
19 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1630 (Jesse McWaters, Senior Vice
President, Global Head of Regulatory Advocacy, Mastercard).
20 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1650 (Charlaine Bouchard, Research Chair
in Smart Contracts and Blockchain, Digital Governance Institute).
21 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1545 (Patrick Mandic, Chief Executive
Officer, Mavennet Systems Inc.).
22 Ibid.
14
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
retailers to “verify what product was contaminated and where it was delivered, and
quickly remove the items from stores, saving companies millions in food recalls and
improving Canadian food security.”23
Witnesses also highlighted the ability of blockchain-enabled supply chains to help
track CO2 emissions and improve carbon credit systems. According to Tanya Woods,
Chief Executive Officer, Futurity Partners, the “carbon credit market is complex and
challenged by a lack of transparency and traceability, and authenticity issues regarding
the credits sold and the projects related to the credits,” and blockchain could help
provide “verified carbon credits.”24
Guillaume Déziel, Digital Culture Strategist, Digital Governance Institute, pointed to the
distribution of revenues in cultural industries, such as music and video game production,
stating that blockchain could allow companies to “automatically distribute [revenue] to
the people who should be receiving them … without human intervention, seamlessly,
transparently and in perpetuity.”25 Referring to fraud detection in the distribution of
royalties for music streaming, Morgan Hayduk said his company is now able to track
“trillions of individual events annually, across hundreds of services, with thousands of
rights holders each having an audit right over that service for their catalogue.”26
Blockchain is also enabling new digital-native industries, like businesses built around the
sale and trade of non-fungible tokens (NFTs). A NFT is a record of ownership stored on a
blockchain ledger of a unique, i.e., non-fungible, asset. NFTs are most closely associated
with ownership of unique digital assets, like artwork, but may also record ownership of
real-world property.27 Citing the example of the National Basketball Association’s digital
collectibles marketplace, Top Shot, Alison Kutler, Head of Government Affairs, Dapper
Labs, said the NFTs her company produces:28
provide real utility. They strengthen relationships between fans and their favourite
players and teams and entertainers, providing new creative channels for brand
23 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1540 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
24 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1615 (Tanya Woods, Chief Executive
Officer, Futurity Partners).
25 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1655 (Guillaume Déziel, Digital Culture
Strategist, Digital Governance Institute).
26 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1535 (Morgan Hayduk, Co-Chief Executive
Officer, Beatdapp Software Inc.).
27 Ethereum, Non-fungible tokens (NFT).
28 National Basketball Association, Top Shot.
15
expression, engaged and exciting communities, and opportunities for consumers to be
rewarded for their fandom, online and off-line.29
Public Sector Applications
Witnesses also identified public sector applications where blockchain could improve the
provision of public services and program delivery. Aidan Hyman, Chief Executive Officer,
Chainsafe Systems Inc., gave the example of a World Food Programme project which has
used blockchain to provide cash assistance to refugees and to date has transferred
US$325 million to one million refugees in Jordan and Bangladesh.30
Patrick Mandic spoke about his firm’s work with both the Canadian and U.S.
governments to use blockchain technology to improve traceability in the oil and gas, and
steel industries, to improve supply chain transparency and potentially reduce fraud.31
While Charlaine Bouchard told the Committee about a project to create a blockchain for
notary public services in Quebec that will seek to automate notarial contracts.32
Tanya Woods pointed to government issued identification as another potential public
sector application: “Passports are a great example. Driver's licences, health cards and
anything that relates to needing to show identity is a digital identity use case.”33
Financial Blockchain Applications
Witnesses generally presented cryptocurrencies as a form of investment, as opposed to
a means of facilitating financial transactions like traditional currencies. Witnesses also
highlighted that cryptocurrencies were a new product unlike existing financial
instruments, and the industry is likely to continue evolving rapidly. According to
29 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1600 (Alison Kutler, Head of Government
Affairs, Dapper Labs).
30 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1105 (Aidan Hyman, Chief Executive
Officer, Chainsafe Systems Inc.); World Food Programme, Building Blocks.
31 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1545 (Patrick Mandic, Chief Executive
Officer, Mavennet Systems Inc.); U.S. Department of Homeland Security, “DHS Awards $86K for Cross-
Border Gas Import Tracking Using Blockchain Technology,” News Release, 9 October 2020; Innovation,
Science and Economic Development Canada, “Government of Canada invests in tracing the steel supply
chain,” News Release, 24 Janaury 2020.
32 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1650 (Charlaine Bouchard, Research Chair
in Smart Contracts and Blockchain, Digital Governance Institute); Université de Laval, Chaîne de blocs
notariale [AVAILABLE IN FRENCH ONLY].
33 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1705 (Tanya Woods, Chief Executive
Officer, Futurity Partners).
16
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
Pascal St-Jean, President, 3iQ Corporation, cryptocurrencies allow “citizens to invest in
the foundations of the technology, which was not possible before.”34
So-called “smart contracts,” which will allow for forms of “decentralized finance,” were
one commonly cited application of cryptocurrency networks beyond simply holding
cryptocurrencies as investments. As Pascal St-Jean explained, using the example of the
information used to determine the terms of a mortgage:
A smart contract is essentially a programmatical way of entering all this information into
a contract that is basically observed and triggered based on data that gets provided.
Let’s say we were to go online and generate a contract together: I’ll loan you x amount
for x percentage, and you will give me x amount in collateral, and if you pay it back by a
certain date, you’ll get your collateral back. This is all triggered by computer code, which
is a smart contract. That enables a lot of innovation of peer-to-peer finance, which is
decentralized finance.35
Aidan Hyman noted that the use of smart contracts can be taken further, “enabling
individuals to create these autonomous organizations through a series of smart
contracts that enable functionality way beyond trading crypto.”36
Dina Mainville, Founder and Principal, Collisionless, among others, pointed to “the
fractionalized ownership of traditional assets that are becoming increasingly out of
reach for Canadians, like real estate” as a financial service that could be unlocked
through blockchain.37 According to Pascal St-Jean, “Fractionalization of ownership,
whether it is of cryptocurrency, real estate, fine art or other assets, will enable
Canadians across the country to have a small piece of assets to help them grow their net
worth as they try to build a life for themselves.”38
In discussing the advantages of cryptocurrencies, many witnesses emphasized their
potential to better serve those currently underserved, or excluded, by the banking
sector. Koleya Karringten listed financial inclusion as the first example of how blockchain
34 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1640 (Pascal St-Jean, President,
3iQ Corporation).
35 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1710 (Pascal St-Jean, President,
3iQ Corporation).
36 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1135 (Aidan Hyman, Chief Executive
Officer, Chainsafe Systems Inc.).
37 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1640 (Dina Mainville, Founder and
Principal, Collisionless).
38 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1615 (Pascal St-Jean, President,
3iQ Corporation).
17
can improve the lives of Canadians or others around the world. Citing the 8 million
Canadians whose credit level is considered “non-prime,” she said firms in the
cryptocurrency sector “provide ways for the unbanked to save [and] access credit.”39
Other witnesses emphasized the potential for cryptocurrencies to help people in the
Global South experiencing hyperinflation or oppression from authoritarian regimes.
According to Ethan Buchman, Chief Executive Officer, Informal Systems Inc.,
“Cryptocurrencies offer an opportunity. They offer a way to escape certain authoritarian
regimes, ways for families in these countries to try to protect their wealth and
potentially to escape with it.”40
Relatedly, witnesses also pointed to facilitating cross-border transactions as a financial
service that can be improved by cryptocurrencies. Justyna Osowka, Founder, Women in
Blockchain Canada, cited conversations with people from similar immigrant backgrounds
“about sending money abroad” being “difficult and expensive” as inspiring her to begin
her career in blockchain.41 Matthew Burgoyne, Co-Chair Digital Assets and Blockchain,
Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, claimed cross-border transactions using cryptocurrencies
could be made “in a matter of seconds, versus waiting sometimes up to a week to settle
cross-border transactions with bank wires.”42
BLOCKCHAIN IN CANADA
Witnesses painted a complex picture of the current state of the blockchain industry
in Canada. From one perspective, Canadians have a demonstrated track record of being
leading developers of the technology and industry innovators. Witnesses highlighted the
development of the Ethereum blockchain network and the launching cryptocurrency-
based investment funds, such as exchange-traded funds for bitcoin and ether, as
examples of Canadian innovation. Aidan Hyman testified that:
Toronto is one of the major homes of the Ethereum project, with almost half of the
Ethereum co-founders being Canadian, mostly notably Vitalik Buterin, the leading
39 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1540 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
40 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1800 (Ethan Buchman, Chief Executive
Officer, Informal Systems Inc.).
41 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1620 (Justyna Osowska, Founder, Women in
Blockchain Canada).
42 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1610 (Matthew Burgoyne, Co-Chair Digital
Assets and Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, As an Individual).
18
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
founder of Ethereum. We've seen many great Canadian companies and projects being
sprung out of the vision and idea that is web3.43
Namir Anani, President and Chief Executive Officer, Information and Communications
Technology Council, citing the findings of a report by his organization, stated that
“”Canada punches above its weight” in global blockchain innovations and
entrepreneurial capacity.”44 Others framed Canada’s advantage more in terms of future
potential, like Koleya Karringten, who believed “Canada has an opportunity to be a
leader in this space, not just on the financial services side but… in the enterprise-level
blockchain space.”45
At the same time, witnesses warned that Canada risks falling behind. According to
Jaime Leverton, Chief Executive Officer, Hut 8 Mining Corporation:
The lack of clarity and the lack of support from a funding perspective have ultimately
driven a lot of our talent away. Canada was very early in this ecosystem. Tons of talents
were born in Canada. They are subsequently taking their businesses, their innovation
and their property, and establishing themselves elsewhere in the world.46
Dina Mainville testified that “the risk of losing Canadian entrepreneurship to other
jurisdictions that maybe afford better clarity or have better incentives for bringing that
entrepreneurship elsewhere is a real risk that we need to address as a community here
in Canada.”47
Blockchain’s Economic Impact in Canada
Witnesses were not able to provide firm estimates of the current value of the blockchain
industry in Canada. Both Pascal St-Jean and Brian Mosoff estimated that “billions” are
43 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1105 (Aidan Hyman, Chief Executive
Officer, Chainsafe Systems Inc.).
44 The Information and Communications Technology Council, Chain Reaction: Investment in Canada’s
Blockchain Ecosystem, August 2020; INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1615
(Namir Anani, President and Chief Executive Officer, Information and Communications Technology Council).
45 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1635 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
46 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1735 (Jaime Leverton, Chief Executive
Officer, Hut 8 Mining Corporation).
47 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1740 (Dina Mainville, Founder and
Principal, Collisionless).
19
being invested in the sector, which has grown significantly in recent years.48 Namir Anani
cited an estimate of the global blockchain industry, stating that it was expected to grow
to US$1.59 trillion by 2030.49
Numbers from Statistics Canada show that use of blockchain technologies among
Canadian businesses remains low but is growing.
Table 2—Use of Blockchain Technologies by Small, Medium-sized
and Large Enterprises in Canada
Small Small Medium-sized Medium-sized Large Large
enterprises enterprises enterprises enterprises enterprises enterprises
2019 2021 2019 2021 2019 2021
0.3 % 0.2% 0.4% 0.8% 1.6% 2.5%
Source: Statistics Canada, Table 22-10-0117-01 Information and communication technologies used by
industry and size of enterprises.
In terms of employment, witnesses emphasized the broad range of expertise required by
blockchain businesses. Speaking of cryptocurrency trading platforms’ employment
needs, Evan Thomas, Head of Legal, Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple, said:
[W]e have engineers; we have designers; we have operational professionals; we have
anti-money-laundering specialists and other regulatory specialists. We have to bring
together all of their various talents in order to offer these services.50
Dina Mainville highlighted that the blockchain industry “offers uniquely low barriers to
entry” for potential employees while paying competitive salaries.51 Namir Anani
estimated total employment in the industry at 16,000 in 2020, while Stephen Oliver
48 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1650 (Pascal St-Jean, President, 3iQ
Corporation); INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1105 (Brian Mosoff, Chief
Executive Officer, President of Canadian Web3 Council, Ether Capital).
49 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1615 (Namir Anani, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Information and Communications Technology Council).
50 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1245 (Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple).
51 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1640 (Dina Mainville, Founder and
Principal, Collisionless).
20
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
cited statistics claiming 13,000 people worked for cryptocurrency firms registered with
the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada (FINTRAC) in 2022.52
As it relates to the demand side of the industry, Evan Thomas pointed to recent studies
by the Bank of Canada and the Ontario Securities Commission (OSC) as offering insights
into the adoption of cryptocurrencies by Canadians.53 The OSC report, which was based
on a survey conducted in Spring 2022, included the following findings:
• 13% of Canadians owned at least one type of crypto asset (including
through investment funds);
• Crypto asset owners were disproportionately male (67%), between the
ages of 25 and 44 (59%), and university educated (49%);
• A majority (53%) of owners who purchased crypto assets directly
reported the present value of their assets at below $5,000, while half of
owners who own crypto assets through an investment fund reported
present value below $10,000;
• Approximately half of owners who purchased crypto assets directly, did
so through a cryptocurrency trading platform and hold their
cryptocurrency through such a platform.54
The Blockchain Ecosystem
A variety of organizations have grown around blockchain networks, and, through
organizations such as the Canadian Blockchain Consortium, are organizing at the
industrial level. In describing their organizations, witnesses who testified during the
Committee’s study demonstrated the breadth of activities being undertaken around
blockchain networks.
52 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1615 (Namir Anani, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Information and Communications Technology Council); INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament,
1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1705 (Stephen Oliver, Chief Compliance Officer and Head of Calgary, Tetra
Trust Company).
53 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1115 (Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple); Daniela Balutel et al., “Bitcoin Awareness, Ownership and Use: 2016–
20,” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper, September 2022; Ontario Securities Commission, Crypto Asset
Survey: Final Report, September 2022.
54 Ontario Securities Commission, Crypto Asset Survey: Final Report, September 2022.
21
Many blockchain businesses are focused solely, or primarily, on the exchange of
cryptocurrencies. Crypto-asset trading platforms, like Wealthsimple, Shakepay, WonderFi
Technologies and the National Digital Asset Exchange, provide services for the buying,
selling, and trading of cryptocurrencies and are one of the primary means by which
many users access cryptocurrency markets and hold cryptocurrencies. In contrast, firms
like Ether Capital and 3iQ have focused on providing access to cryptocurrency markets
through other means, such as exchange-traded funds.
Other firms, like Bitfarms, Hut 8 and DMG Blockchain Solutions, work in cryptocurrency
mining, providing the computational services for the proof of work consensus
mechanisms that underly cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin. Less well-known firms like Tetra
Trust Company, act as cryptocurrency custodians, holding the assets of exchanges and
their customers in trust, in what is often referred to as “cold storage.”
The Committee also heard from representatives of firms that are using blockchain
technology in other sectors, such as Beatdapp Software which uses blockchain for
auditing and fraud detection in digital media, and Dapper Labs, which creates NFTs.
Other firms, such as Mavennet Systems, Informal Systems and Chainsafe Systems, focus
on the development of software and digital products using blockchain technology.
The blockchain ecosystem also contains firms, like Collisionless and Futurity Partners,
providing consulting and advisory services as well as non-profit and academic
organizations, such as Women in Blockchain Canada, the Digital Governance Institute
and the Information and Communications Technology Council, that study and promote
the benefits of blockchain. Finally, firms from other sectors are also participating in the
blockchain industry, including financial firms, such as Mastercard, and Canadian
law firms.
The State of Blockchain Regulation in Canada
Canada’s regulation of blockchain firms is evolving along with the technology itself.
Generally speaking, regulators have been focused on cryptocurrencies, in particular
firms engaging in cryptocurrency markets and providing related financial services to
Canadians, such as cryptocurrency trading platforms. Regulation of cryptocurrencies is
occurring at both federal and provincial level, with provincial securities regulators
playing an important role.
This increased interest by Canadian regulators is broadly is line with developments in
other jurisdictions. Regulators around the world have been expanding the regulation of
cryptocurrency to make their treatment more consistent with the treatment of similar
22
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
financial instruments. As the Financial Stability Board stated in its proposed framework
for the regulation of crypto assets, regulations should be based on the principle of
“same activity, same risk, same regulation.”55 Experts have noted, however, that while
there is a general push for greater regulation, approaches very significantly across
jurisdictions, leading to a fragmented international landscape for cryptocurrency
regulation.56
The Canada Revenue Agency considers cryptocurrencies as commodities for the
purposes of the Income Tax Act, meaning that when they are used to purchase goods
and services, the transaction is considered a barter transaction (i.e., an exchange not
involving legal currency).57 The disposition of cryptocurrencies, for example by using
them to make purchase or selling them for Canadian dollars, results in capital gains or
losses for tax purposes (or business income or loss where the transaction is a
business activity).58
Amendments made to the Excise Tax Act in 2021 defined most cryptocurrencies as a
“virtual payment instrument,” thereby including cryptocurrencies within the existing
GST/HST exempt for financial services.59 This means that the purchase of
cryptocurrencies is not generally subject to GST/HST (GST/HST must still be paid on
goods and services purchased with cryptocurrencies).60
Cryptocurrency firms are also regulated at the federal level under the Proceeds of Crime
(Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act.61 Businesses dealing in virtual currency,
as defined by the Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing
Regulations, are required to register as a money services business with FINTRAC and
55 Financial Stability Board, International Regulation of Crypto-asset Activities: A proposed framework –
questions for consultation, 11 October 2022.
56 PwC, PwC Global Crypto Regulation Report 2023, 19 December 2022.
57 Income Tax Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. 1 (5th Supp.).
58 Canada Revenue Agency, Guide for cryptocurrency users and tax professionals.
59 Excise Tax Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. E-15; Finance Canada, Explanatory Notes Relating to the Excise Tax Act,
May 2019.
60 At the time of writing, further cryptocurrency-related amendments to the Excise Tax Act, relating the
GST/HST treatment of cryptocurrency mining, were before Parliament, witness commentary on the
proposals is provided in a later section.
61 Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act, S.C. 2000, c. 17.
23
fulfill the related requirements regarding “know your client,” transaction reporting and
record keeping.62
Provincial and territorial securities regulators, often acting collectively through their
national umbrella organization, the Canadian Securities Administrators (CSA), have taken
the position that many crypto assets are securities or derivatives, and therefore subject
to securities legislation. The CSA has further found that even where businesses are solely
engaging in transactions involving cryptocurrency that are considered commodities, like
bitcoin and ether, the underlying contract between the business and their customers
may constitute a security or derivative, making them subject to regulation.63
To assist cryptocurrency firms in meeting their regulatory obligations, the CSA initiated a
Regulatory Sandbox program, by which provincial regulators may provide temporary
exemptive relief from certain legal requirements to cryptocurrency firms.64 This relief
allows firms to continue to operate while they become regulatorily compliant, including
through registration with the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada. At
the time of writing, the Ontario Securities Commission listed 11 firms that have received
exemptive relief as either a dealer or a marketplace under provincial legislation.65
Cryptocurrency Trading Platforms
According to Evan Thomas, there are “about 11 Canadian-based crypto trading
platforms,” which “serve Canadians primarily, if not exclusively,” as well as at least 15
“foreign platforms that serve many countries, including Canada.”66 Tanim Rasul, Chief
Operating Officer, National Digital Asset Exchange Inc., citing information from the OSC,
stated that “three of the top four platforms used by Canadians are foreign-based.”67
62 Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Regulations, SOR/2002-184; Financial
Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre, Money services businesses.
63 Canadian Securities Administrators, CSA Staff Notice 21-327 Guidance on the Application of Securities
Legislation to Entities Facilitating the Trading of Crypto Assets, 16 January 2020.
64 Canadian Securities Administrators, CSA Regulatory Sandbox; Canadian Securities Administrators, Staff
Notice 21-329 Guidance for Crypto-Asset Trading Platforms: Compliance with Regulatory Requirements,
29 March 2021.
65 Ontario Securities Commission, Registered crypto asset trading platforms.
66 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1115 (Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple).
67 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1550 (Tanim Rasul, Chief Operating
Officer, National Digital Asset Exchange Inc.).
24
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
Witnesses generally believed that cryptocurrency trading platforms are sufficiently
regulated to protect consumers from risks seen from foreign platforms. Several
witnesses cited the 2019 collapse of QuadrigaCX, a Canadian cryptocurrency trading
platform, as motivation for Canadian regulators taking a stronger approach to regulation
than other jurisdictions. As Koleya Karringten explained, following QuadrigaCX’s collapse,
Canadian regulators came in and we have been working very closely with them, law
enforcement, [the Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada] and [the
Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions] for years to not only make sure
that Canada has the strongest regulations, but that we have safeguarded and made sure
that consumers are protected.68
Evan Thomas explained the regulatory requirements that platforms must follow:
Platforms that hold crypto for clients must register with Canadian securities regulators
and comply with specific requirements. For example, we must keep at least 80% of our
clients’ crypto-assets with regulated and insured crypto custodians. We do ongoing due
diligence on every crypto asset that we list. We create and update risk disclosures for
every asset. We hold our clients’ crypto assets in trust. We do not lend out or use our
clients’ property, ever. We are also registered with FINTRAC, Canada's financial
intelligence agency, and we have built a robust anti-money-laundering and sanctions
compliance program.69
Adam Garetson, General Counsel and Chief Legal Officer, WonderFi Technologies Inc.,
also noted that firms like his are “public compan[ies], so we are subject to the same
laws, rules and requirements of any other traditional publicly traded TSX-listed company,
including displaying audited financial statements quarterly and annually, etc.”70
One aspect of Canada’s regulatory requirements for platforms highlighted by witnesses
was the need for cold storage. As Adam Garetson explained:
under the modified crypto rules that layer onto the more traditional securities
requirements, we are required to hold 80% of client assets in what's referred to as “cold
storage”. … [T]he security regulators require platforms like ours to hold 80%-plus of our
client assets in the vault, in cold storage, at all times, and only take them out if we’re
going to be moving them around. In practice, what that means for trading platforms like
68 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1610 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
69 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1115 (Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple).
70 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1125 (Adam Garetson, General Counsel
and Chief Legal Officer, WonderFi Technologies Inc.).
25
ours is that 95%-plus of our assets typically remain in cold storage, with only a small
portion of that—3% to 5%—coming out to do daily transactions.71
Stephen Oliver, Chief Compliance Officer and Head of Calgary, Tetra Trust Company,
testified that his firm is “Canada's first and only regulated custodian for crypto assets”
and “was established as a special-purpose trust company incorporated under the Loan
and Trust Corporations Act of Alberta.” He went on to state that “[d]igital asset
custodians are the foundational piece of all risk mitigation strategies related to digital
assets” as they “act as a trusted independent third party to secure the assets of
institutions and their underlying investors.”72
Cryptocurrency Mining Firms
Witnesses highlighted both Canada’s competitive advantage in cryptocurrency mining
and the benefits the industry provides to Canada. According to Sheldon Bennett, Chief
Executive Officer, DMG Blockchain Solutions Inc., Digital Asset Mining Coalition, there
has been “a dynamic shift” of cryptocurrency mining “out of Europe and Asia and into
North America…because of the rule of law, because of infrastructure and because of a
well-educated workforce—all things that Canada has.”73 Jaime Leverton noted that
“Canada's natural cooling system, our cold winters,” help Canadian firms to “to minimize
heat and mine much more efficiently than many of our global peers.”74 While
Daniel Brock, Law Partner, Fasken, Digital Asset Mining Coalition said “Canada has a
decided advantage because we have an abundance of clean, renewable energy.”75
Geoffrey Morphy, President and Chief Executive Officer, Bitfarms Ltd., Digital Asset
Mining Coalition, spoke about how his firm has provided “considerable value to the
Canadian economy:”
We pay corporate and other taxes; we have spent almost half a billion dollars on our
Canadians operations through investments in construction, materials and equipment;
71 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1130 (Adam Garetson, General Counsel
and Chief Legal Officer, WonderFi Technologies Inc.).
72 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1655 (Stephen Oliver, Chief Compliance
Officer and Head of Calgary, Tetra Trust Company).
73 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1705 (Sheldon Bennett, Chief Executive
Officer, DMG Blockchain Solutions Inc., Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
74 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1610 (Jaime Leverton, Chief Executive
Officer, Hut 8 Mining Corporation).
75 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1755 (Daniel Brock, Law Partner, Fasken,
Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
26
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
and we generate much-needed revenue for smaller locally owned hydro companies and
their municipal owners.76
Other witnesses also emphasized the benefits that cryptocurrency mining operations
provide to smaller population centers. Sheldon Bennett said his firm’s operations in
Christina Lake, British Columbia is “one of Canada's leading digital asset mining
facilities,” built in a “abandoned wood processing factory that had been shut down for
close to a decade.”77
Despite these benefits, witnesses also spoke about the challenges related to the energy
usage of cryptocurrency mining operations, which globally is comparable to the energy
consumption of entire countries. According to the Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity
Consumption Index, the Bitcoin blockchain network uses 121 terawatt hours of
electricity per year, which, were it a country, would rank it 33rd in energy usage, behind
Argentina and ahead of the Netherlands.78
Concerns have been raised by electricity utilities in Canada regarding the demands being
placed on power grids by cryptocurrency mining firms, with utilities in several provinces
placing curbs on new mining connections.79 A report from BC Hydro found that the
“unprecedented level of requests” for new connections from cryptocurrency mining
firms, if not properly managed, “could mean less energy for greener pursuits such as
electrification or hydrogen production, and higher electricity rates for
British Columbians.”80
Witnesses acknowledged the high energy usage of cryptocurrency mining but pointed to
innovations in the industry that have mitigated the strain that this usage puts on energy
infrastructure and the environment. The use of renewable energy sources was a
common example provided. According to Jaime Leverton, Bitcoin mining is “one of the
most renewable-intensive industries on the planet,” and its energy usage can be used for
76 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1645 (Geoffrey Morphy, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Bitfarms Ltd., Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
77 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1645 (Sheldon Bennett, Chief Executive
Officer, DMG Blockchain Solutions Inc., Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
78 Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index, Comparisons, accessed 15 March 2023.
79 Manitoba Hydro, “Province directs Manitoba Hydro to pause new cryptocurrency connections,” Press
Release, 28 November 2022; Ministry of Energy, Mines and Low Carbon Innovation, Government of British
Columbia, “Province hits pause on electrical connections for cryptocurrency mining,” Press Release,
21 December 2022; Hydro Québec, Quebec’s blockchain industry.
80 BC Hydro, Crypto conundrum: Why cryptocurrency mining could challenge B.C.’s clean transition,
December 2022.
27
the “greater good… to build stable, renewable [energy] grids.”81 Koleya Karringten spoke
about how mining firms work with utilities to take of advantage of energy that would
otherwise go to waste and participate in “load balancing,” whereby mining operations
shutdown during peak usage hours “to support the grid.”82
Other witnesses pointed to alternative consensus mechanisms as a means of reducing
cryptocurrency energy consumption. As Brian Mosoff stated, “Ethereum… has
transitioned away from proof of work to something called proof of stake and has
reduced its energy footprint by over 99.9% because there is no more electricity in
computing hardware” needed to achieve consensus.83
CURRENT CHALLENGES
While witnesses were unanimous in expressing their optimism for the future of
blockchain, many also acknowledged that the cryptocurrency industry faces a number of
challenges. In some cases, witnesses stated media reporting was overly negative or that
issues were merely the product of a new industry maturing, but many witnesses also
recognized that recent events in the industry require action by industry participants
and governments.
Fraud Committed by Cryptocurrency Companies
Witnesses acknowledged that high-profile cases of cryptocurrency firms, in particular
cryptocurrency trading platforms, allegedly defrauding their customers has had a
negative effect on the industry. The most commonly cited case, that of Bahamas-based
FTX Trading Ltd., became public during the Committee’s study. In December 2022, the
United States Securities and Exchange Commission charged FTX chief executive officer
and co-founder, Samuel Bankman-Fried, with fraud relating to the misuse
of US$1.8 billion in clients’ investments.84
81 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1750 (Jaime Leverton, Chief Executive
Officer, Hut 8 Mining Corporation).
82 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1630 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
83 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1215 (Brian Mosoff, Chief Executive
Officer, President of Canadian Web3 Council, Ether Capital).
84 United States Securities and Exchange Commission, “SEC Charges Samuel Bankman-Fried with Defrauding
Investors in Crypto Asset Trading Platform FTX,” Press Release, 13 December 2022.
28
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
Witnesses also referenced the Canadian case of QuadrigaCX, which ceased operations
and filed for creditor protection in February 2019, ultimately resulting in investor losses
of at least $169 million. An investigation by the OSC attributed most of those losses to
the fraudulent behaviour of the firm’s deceased chief executive officer and co-founder,
Gerald Cotton. The OSC report on the case compared the firm’s operations to a Ponzi
scheme and described it as “old-fashioned fraud wrapped in modern technology.”85
In reference to the FTX case, Aidan Hyman said it is “critical to separate the technology
from bad actors. Fraud is illegal no matter how it happens or what technology is used to
commit it” and it would be “pretty harmful” to take “a negative stance about crypto and
blockchain technology altogether.”86 Evan Thomas made a similar comment: “These risk
and failures… are organizational, not technological; that is, these businesses fail because
of how they run their businesses, not because of blockchain or crypto.”87
Koleya Karringten testified that these cases do not “represent any of the exchanges we
currently have in Canada,” while Jean Amiouny stated that “[t]he measures that
platforms are subject to here in Canada mean that the risks [of fraud] are much lower.”88
Charlaine Bouchard noted, however, that even if these cases are the exception, they
nonetheless demonstrate the need for regulation: “Like any technology, blockchain is
used in a world in which some individuals will misuse them, and that, unfortunately for
the fierce advocates who have developed these technologies, [means it] will require
protection for consumers.”89
Other Cryptocurrency-related Crime
In addition to some prominent cryptocurrency firms being accused of criminal
behaviour, the cryptocurrency sector also faces accusations of being used in other types
of criminal activity, either specific to cryptocurrencies, such as thefts through hacking
and scams perpetrated against consumers, or where cryptocurrencies are used to
85 Ontario Securities Commission, “Executive Summary,” QuadrigaCX: A Review by the Staff of the Ontario
Securities Commission, 2020.
86 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1105 (Aidan Hyman, Chief Executive
Officer, Chainsafe Systems Inc.).
87 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1115 (Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple).
88 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1610 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium); INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session,
24 November 2022, 1650 (Jean Amiouny, Co-founder and Chief Executive Officer, Shakepay Inc.).
89 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1655 (Charlaine Bouchard, Research Chair
in Smart Contracts and Blockchain, Digital Governance Institute).
29
facilitate other crimes, for example as a means of money laundering or terrorism
financing. A February 2023 report by blockchain data platform Chainalysis found that
cryptocurrency illicit transaction volumes were at an all-time high in 2022, with an
estimated value of US$20.6 billion.90 The report did note, however, that most of the
growth in illicit transactions could be attributed to United States (U.S.) sanctions against
Russian cryptocurrency firms following the invasion of Ukraine, and that the estimate
represents just 0.24% of all cryptocurrency transactions.
In Canada, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) has stated they received reports
of cryptocurrency fraud leading to the loss of $75 million in 2021, a sharp increase from
previous years. An article published by the RCMP gave the example of criminals using
cryptocurrency automated teller machines, often located in convenience stores and
other small businesses, as a means getting victims to transfer them funds under
false pretenses.91
Witnesses emphasized that the secure nature of blockchain technology does not
necessarily apply to the firms and platforms that interact, or allow consumers to
interact, with it. As Justyna Osowska testified, “[i]t's the technology between the
blockchain and how it interacts with the real world” that raises security concerns.92
Pascal St-Jean agreed, stating “[t]he risks are not necessarily related to blockchains, but
rather to third-party applications,” which if not properly secure will “definitely
get hacked.”93
Speaking to the prevalence of cryptocurrency scams, Matthew Burgoyne said he
receives a call “roughly once every two weeks … from a Canadian who has been the
victim of fraud,” and that law enforcement is unsuccessful in retrieving the funds in “the
majority of cases” as “[t]he crypto has been transferred to someone out of the country,
and nobody knows where.”94
In contrast, other witnesses noted how the transparency of blockchains can assist law
enforcement to apprehend criminals. Stephen Oliver said the “traceability in blockchain”
90 Chainalysis, The 2023 Crypto Crime Report, February 2023.
91 Paul Northcott, “Countering the rise of cryptocurrency fraud,” Gazette magazine, 23 March 2022.
92 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1700 (Justyna Osowska, Founder, Women in
Blockchain Canada).
93 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1645 (Pascal St-Jean, President,
3iQ Corporation).
94 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1645 (Matthew Burgoyne, Co-Chair Digital
Assets and Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, As an Individual).
30
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
has enabled firms to identify “bad actors,” and led to “law enforcement agencies being
able to recover funds and sometimes arrest the culprits.”95 Tanya Woods spoke of a case
where a blockchain firm partnered with law enforcement in the U.S. to take down a child
pornography network as an example of where the use of cryptocurrency by criminals led
to their apprehension.96
Cryptocurrency Volatility
Witnesses also addressed the perception that cryptocurrencies are volatile, high-risk
investments. This perception was supported by the performance of many
cryptocurrencies in 2022. At the time of writing, Bitcoin, which is estimated to represent
over 40% of the cryptocurrency industry, had been valued as high as US$48,086.84 and
as low as US$15,599.05 over the previous 12 months.97 Brian Mosoff acknowledged that
“[t]he assets are volatile” and that the cryptocurrency industry is “in a very speculative
part of the cycle,” but said that “a societal shift… to a more digital economy, to embrace
these technologies” still presented an opportunity. Jaime Leverton described Bitcoin’s
loss of value as “not entirely abnormal” and that “[m]any securities fluctuate in the
same way.”98
Other witnesses differentiated between Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. Brad Mills,
Angel Investor, Bitcoin Coalition of Canada, testified that “you really can't lump Bitcoin in
with the rest of everything else that's going on” as many cryptocurrencies are “just
unregistered securities, often unethically launched and fraudulently pumped on
unregulated crypto exchanges, leaving retail buyers holding the bag when the bubble
collapses.”99 Jean Amiouny, Patrick Mandic, Morgan Hayduk, Koleya Karringten and
95 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1710 (Stephen Oliver, Chief Compliance
Officer and Head of Calgary, Tetra Trust Company). For more information on international law enforcement
efforts related to cryptocurrencies, including descriptions of recent successful cases, see U.S. Department of
Justice, The Report of the Attorney General Pursuant to Section 8(b)(iv) of Executive Order 14067: How To
Strengthen International Law Enforcement Cooperation For Detecting, Investigating, And Prosecuting
Criminal Activity Related To Digital Assets, June 2022.
96 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1620 (Tanya Woods, Chief Executive
Officer, Futurity Partners). The witness is likely referring to a 2019 case where blockchain data platform
Chainalysis said it assisted in analyzing cryptocurrency transactions as part of the investigation, see
Chainalysis, Chainalysis in Action: DOJ Announces Shutdown of Largest Child Pornography Website,
16 October 2019.
97 CoinMarketCap, Bitcoin (accessed 10 March 2023).
98 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1610 (Jaime Leverton, Chief Executive
Officer, Hut 8 Mining Corporation).
99 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1640 (Brad Mills, Angel Investor, Bitcoin
Coalition of Canada).
31
Andrew Batey, Co-Chief Executive Officer, Beatdapp Software Inc. also made this
distinction, describing cryptocurrency investments, other than Bitcoin, as high risk.100
WAYS GOVERNMENTS CAN SUPPORT BLOCKCHAIN
Over the course of the Committee’s study, witnesses made a number of
recommendations regarding how regulators and other public sector actors can better
support the blockchain industry.
Regulatory Clarity
A common issue raised by witnesses was the need for, or the current lack of, regulatory
clarity for blockchain firms in Canada. According Aidan Hyman, “Canada has fallen
behind other jurisdictions like the U.S. and Europe when it comes to digital asset
policies,” and there is “an opportunity of a generation” to create “regulatory clarity and
clear standards so that businesses can flourish in Canada.”101 Ethan Buchman said “it's
not clear which regulators have jurisdiction over which blockchains and blockchain
products,” that creates “a huge problem for entrepreneurs.”102 Brian Mosoff described
the current situation in Canada as “a fragmented securities regulatory environment.”103
Witnesses said that this lack of clarity has motivated some Canadians to establish or
move their firms to other jurisdictions. Dina Mainville warned firms will “continue to
leave Canada in favour of building companies in places with better regulatory clarity”
and Jaime Leverton cited a lack of clarity as a reason Canada has “driven a lot of our
talent away.”104 Koleya Karringten pointed out that where firms move to “more
lax…regulatory jurisdictions” offshore, it means that “consumers aren't protected.”105
100 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1640.
101 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1105 (Aidan Hyman, Chief Executive
Officer, Chainsafe Systems Inc.).
102 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1650 (Ethan Buchman, Chief Executive
Officer, Informal Systems Inc.).
103 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1140 (Brian Mosoff, Chief Executive
Officer, President of Canadian Web3 Council, Ether Capital).
104 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1640 (Dina Mainville, Founder and Principal,
Collisionless); INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1735 (Jaime Leverton, Chief
Executive Officer, Hut 8 Mining Corporation).
105 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1615 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
32
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
One tangible example provided by witnesses of this lack of clarity is related to the
regulation of crypto assets that differ from cryptocurrencies. According to
Koleya Karringten, “Canada needs to clearly delineate which digital assets qualify as
securities, derivatives, commodities, data and currencies” through “the development of
a digital asset taxonomy.”106 Dina Mainville made a similar comment, recommending
that Canada “take a nuanced approach to regulation by differentiating between types of
crypto assets, by creating appropriate provisions for those assets and by regulating only
the parts of this industry that make sense.”107 Speaking to her firm’s experience
producing NFTs, Alison Kutler cautioned against a “one-size-fits-all approach,” stating
“[t]his is not to say that NFTs should not be regulated, just that they shouldn't be
governed by what would be overly burdensome rules taken from other sectors.”108
Several witnesses pointed to the European Union (EU) as an example of a jurisdiction
that has introduced effective regulations. In June 2022, the Council of the EU and the
European Parliament reached a provisional agreement for regulations on markets in
crypto-assets (MiCA).109 The proposed MiCA regulations, which must still be formally
adopted by both institutions, seeks to protect consumers through measures such as
mandatory registration for all crypto-asset service providers. Dina Mainville stated that
“the new MiCA regulation in the EU is much more comprehensive than many of the
regulatory moves we've seen previously.”110 Laure Fouin, Co-Chair Digital Assets and
Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, noted that the MiCA regulations “pay
particular attention to stable cryptocurrency backed by the euro,” and exclude NFTs,
deciding to “regulate them differently.”111 According to her, the proposed regulations
provide “some legal clarity, but it brings with it a lot of issues worth considering.”112
106 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1540 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
107 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1640 (Dina Mainville, Founder and
Principal, Collisionless).
108 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1600 (Alison Kutler, Head of Government
Affairs, Dapper Labs).
109 Council of the European Union, “Digital finance: agreement reached on European crypto-assets regulation
(MiCA),” Press Release, 30 June 2022.
110 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1725 (Dina Mainville, Founder and
Principal, Collisionless).
111 For an analysis of the effect of proposed MiCA regulations on NFTs, see EU Blockchain Observatory and
Forum, NFT – Legal Token Classification.
112 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1605 (Laure Fouin, Co-Chair Digital Assets
and Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, As an Individual).
33
Engagement on a National Strategy
As a means of addressing the perceived lack of regulatory clarity, witnesses
recommended that governments at all levels engage more with industry participants
and that the federal government needs to develop a national strategy. Tanya Woods said
that “engagement is really important,” as the “rapid rate of change” that the blockchain
industry is experiencing “can really only be best understood by industry.”113 Speaking to
his experience engaging with the federal government on blockchain-related taxation
issues, Daniel Brock stated that “there hasn't been any meaningful interaction between
those officials who are drafting the laws and government decision-makers who are
having these laws passed to really understand what's happening in the industry.”114
According to Dina Mainville, “for Canada's blockchain economy to prosper, collaboration
between government stakeholders and industry practitioners is required to develop a
national regulatory framework.”115 Koleya Karringten made a similar comment:
The value of having the government collaborate with this industry specifically would be
to help engage with regulators and industry to develop frameworks that are going to
not just protect consumers but allow for products to get tested on the market in a safe
way, to allow for this industry and the innovation within this industry to
expand exponentially.116
Witnesses also referenced Bill C-249, An Act respecting the encouragement of the
growth of the cryptoasset sector, which was defeated in the House of Commons at
second reading, as part of the discussion of government engaging with the blockchain
industry.117 Jaime Leverton was “disappointed in the defeat” of the bill and
Koleya Karringten said it would have probably been “a good step.”118
113 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1635 (Tanya Woods, Chief Executive
Officer, Futurity Partners).
114 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1745 (Daniel Brock, Law Partner, Fasken,
Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
115 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1640 (Dina Mainville, Founder and
Principal, Collisionless).
116 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1635 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
117 Bill C-249, An Act respecting the encouragement of the growth of the cryptoasset sector, 44th Parliament,
1st Session.
118 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1610 (Jaime Leverton, Chief Executive
Officer, Hut 8 Mining Corporation); INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1700
(Koleya Karringten, Executive Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
34
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
Stablecoins
Stablecoins were one type of crypto asset highlighted by witnesses as in need of greater
regulatory attention. As Matthew Burgoyne explained, stablecoins are “a digital token
that's anchored one for one with the Canadian dollar,” and provincial securities
regulators have “taken a position that these Canadian dollar-anchored stablecoins …
should be regulated as securities,” even though “the intent is to use these tokens like
currency,” and “no one's really buying these Canadian dollar-anchored stablecoins with
the expectation that they're going to increase in value.”119
Jesse McWaters also believed that “a particular focus should be given to stablecoins,”
noting advancements in other jurisdictions, he testified:
Canada may wish to consider the merits of a comprehensive regulatory regime for
stablecoins that imposes robust requirements for liquidity and capital management, as
well as standards for redeemability, consumer protection, operational resilience and the
resolution of stablecoin arrangements in the event of failure.120
Matthew Burgoyne stated that it would be “more appropriate” for stablecoins to “be
regulated under a different regulator like the Bank of Canada or another regulator,
because they're more akin to a currency than a security.”121
Other witnesses made reference to central bank digital currency (CBDC) as a related area
of interest.122 According to Tanim Rasul, “central banks around the world are
understanding the benefits of how they can bring the dollar onto the blockchain,”
including how “CBDC transactions can speed up and secure payments between people
and institutions, banks and businesses.”123
119 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1625 (Matthew Burgoyne, Co-Chair Digital
Assets and Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, As an Individual).
120 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1630 (Jesse McWaters, Senior Vice
President, Global Head of Regulatory Advocacy, Mastercard).
121 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1625 (Matthew Burgoyne, Co-Chair Digital
Assets and Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, As an Individual).
122 The Bank of Canada has considered the possibility of issuing a digital currency and engaged in other
blockchain-related research. On its website, it states: “We are building the capability to issue a digital
version of the Canadian dollar—known as a central bank digital currency (CBDC)—that Canadians can trust
and rely on so we can be ready should the need arise. Currently, we do not have plans to issue a digital
currency. Ultimately, Parliament and the Government of Canada will determine if or when to issue a CBDC.”
Bank of Canada, Central bank digital currency (CBDC).
123 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1615 (Tanim Rasul, Chief Operating
Officer, National Digital Asset Exchange Inc.).
35
Taxation Issues
Issues around the taxation of crypto assets were also raised by witnesses. Accord to
Evan Thomas, “[t]here are various issues relating to taxation of transactions of crypto
assets that could bear some clarification to assist Canadians,” including whether “the
revenues and profits that [foreign] platforms are generating from Canadians' activities
are being appropriately taxed and received by Canada.”124 Ethan Buchman testified that
“the tax code makes it difficult for companies in Canada to understand what tax
liabilities they're going to face in certain kinds of blockchain transactions, because they
don't exactly know how to account for them.”125
Daniel Brock and Tamara Rozansky, Partner, Indirect Tax, Deloitte Canada, Digital Asset
Mining Coalition, spoke extensively regarding proposed changes to the GST/HST
treatment of cryptocurrency mining published by the Department of Finance in
February 2022.126 A revised version of the proposed amendments was later included in
Bill C-47, An Act to implement certain provisions of the budget tabled in Parliament on
March 28, 2023.127 At the time of writing, the bill was under consideration by
Parliament. As Tamara Rozansky explained:
The principal feature of these proposed tax amendments was to declare that digital
asset mining activities are not a commercial activity in Canada. That would mean that
companies engaged in digital asset mining would no longer be eligible to receive input
tax credits, ITCs. For larger digital asset mining companies, these ITCs can have a value in
the tens of millions of dollars.128
According to Daniel Brock, the proposal “is effectively a hidden 5% to 15% tax” on
cryptocurrency mining firms, which has already “had a chilling effect on investment
124 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1235 (Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple).
125 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1735 (Ethan Buchman, Chief Executive
Officer, Informal Systems Inc.).
126 Department of Finance Canada, “Department of Finance consulting on draft tax proposals,” News Release,
4 February 2022.
127 Bill C-47, An Act to implement certain provisions of the budget tabled in Parliament on March 28, 2023,
44th Parliament, 1st Session.
128 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1650 (Tamara Rozansky, Partner, Indirect
Tax, Deloitte Canada, Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
36
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
decisions… in a highly competitive environment” that could have “a serious negative
impact on the future growth and sustainability of these businesses in Canada.”129
Access to Banking and Insurance Services
Difficulty accessing banking and insurance services was also an obstacle for blockchain
firms identified by witnesses. According to Matthew Burgoyne, blockchain firms “who
otherwise comply with regulation and raise significant investment from Canadian
investors are being denied basic business banking and chequing accounts quite
regularly.”130 Dina Mainville, among others, attributed banks’ attitude towards
blockchain firms to a misunderstanding of the current state of the industry:
The banking industry in Canada has classified blockchain businesses as high risk
because of a perceived lack of adherence to traditional rules and concerns related to
money laundering. Cryptocurrency businesses in Canada are required by law to
register with FINTRAC and to meet the regulatory requirements of other money
services businesses.131
Sheldon Bennett noted that this problem included federal Crown corporations, like the
Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC) and Export Development Canada: “BDC
has told me directly that they have a mandate not to support crypto companies.”132
Witnesses highlighted that blockchain firms also face difficulty accessing insurance
services. Matthew Burgoyne said his clients “are forced to obtain policies from offshore
or foreign insurance providers, sometimes at astronomical premiums and rates.”133
Evan Thomas explained that insurance companies “view [blockchain firms] as a new
category of risk” and have “regulatory concerns” that make it difficulty for them to
129 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1815 (Daniel Brock, Law Partner, Fasken,
Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
130 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1610 (Matthew Burgoyne, Co-Chair Digital
Assets and Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, As an Individual).
131 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1640 (Dina Mainville, Founder and
Principal, Collisionless).
132 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1735 (Sheldon Bennett, Chief Executive
Officer, DMG Blockchain Solutions Inc., Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
133 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1610 (Matthew Burgoyne, Co-Chair Digital
Assets and Blockchain, Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP, As an Individual).
37
“underwrite the risk in terms of determining what the risks are and what the losses
may be.”134
Diversity and Inclusion
Justyna Osowska told the Committee that “[W]omen are under-represented in
blockchain technology.”135 Koleya Karringten said her organization’s “goal was to make
sure that we had gender parity within the space” and “that blockchain has an amazing
opportunity to create better inclusion” for “under-represented groups.”136 Both
witnesses pointed to education as one means of promoting greater inclusion in the
industry. According to Justyna Osowska, “women and girls… need role models… need to
see women who are actually succeeding in the field and are being shown that these are
potential careers for them.”137
Research and Education
Some witnesses also highlighted support for research, and its commercialization, as a
means by which the government could support the blockchain industry. Namir Anani
listed “supporting research… with a focus on commercialization through targeted
investments” first among the ways in which government can support the industry, while
Ethan Buchman gave the example of current support to artificial intelligence research as
the type of “strong, supportive stance” that the government should take towards
blockchain technology.138
Many witnesses also mentioned education as an area in need of greater attention to
create a better general understanding of the blockchain industry as well as to better
protect consumers from fraudulent behaviour. In terms of consumer protection, Jean-
François Gauthier, Chief Executive Officer, Digital Governance Institute, said “very strong
134 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1250 (Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple).
135 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1620 (Justyna Osowska, Founder, Women in
Blockchain Canada).
136 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 24 November 2022, 1710 (Koleya Karringten, Executive
Director, Canadian Blockchain Consortium).
137 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1635 (Justyna Osowska, Founder, Women in
Blockchain Canada).
138 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1620 (Namir Anani, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Information and Communications Technology Council); INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament,
1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1740 (Ethan Buchman, Chief Executive Officer, Informal Systems Inc.).
38
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
measures should be taken to increase people's digital literacy to help them do a better
job of managing their digital identity.”139 Tanya Woods made a similar comment,
recommending the government “fund programs for digital literacy that include
blockchain education, crypto education, NFT education, metaverse education and so on.
It's fundamental.”140 Namir Anani said that blockchain education should “begin in
elementary schools.”141
Talent Development and Retention
Namir Anani also testified that “work is needed with post-secondary institutions because
it's important to develop talent to meet industry needs.”142 According to Sheldon
Bennett, “universities are very interested in this technology, because their students are
very interested in it.”143 Jean-François Gauthier pointed to “the creation of the first
research chair on smart contracts in Quebec, at Université Laval,” currently held by
fellow witness Charlaine Bouchard, as an example of universities increasing their
blockchain related programs.144 Aidan Hyman gave the example of a “blockchain
education network” of “maybe 50-plus universities” that he and his co-founders
participated in prior to entering the industry as the type of initiative that “that help[s]
foster the kind of great skills that are necessary to participate in these high
skill opportunities.”145
The importance of such initiatives was juxtaposed against difficulties firms face in hiring
and retaining the skilled workers they require. Evan Thomas said recruitment and
retention “is a challenge” as blockchain is “truly a global industry” and its workers “are
very mobile,” meaning that Canadian firms “are competing with businesses around the
139 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1720 (Jean-François Gauthier, Chief
Executive Officer, Digital Governance Institute).
140 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1715 (Tanya Woods, Chief Executive
Officer, Futurity Partners).
141 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1725 (Namir Anani, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Information and Communications Technology Council).
142 Ibid.
143 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 1 February 2023, 1820 (Sheldon Bennett, Chief Executive
Officer, DMG Blockchain Solutions Inc., Digital Asset Mining Coalition).
144 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 8 December 2022, 1605 (Jean-François Gauthier, Chief
Executive Officer, Digital Governance Institute).
145 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1245 (Aidan Hyman, Chief Executive
Officer, Chainsafe Systems Inc.).
39
world.”146 Pascal St-Jean warned of a possible “brain drain” of talent leaving Canada as
investment in the blockchain industry continues to increase in other parts of
the world.147
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Over the course of its study, the Committee heard about the real contributions that
blockchain technology is making to the Canadian economy and the potential for it to
provide substantially greater value in the future. While most of the present value is in
the variety of actors participating in the cryptocurrency industry, the Committee was
impressed by testimony regarding the technology’s current and potential applications in
other sectors. Blockchain, together with other technological advances like artificial
intelligence, have the potential to digitalize the parts of our economy that have not been
digitalized already, unlocking efficiencies and value similar to previous waves
of digitalization.
Recommendation 1
That the Government of Canada recognize blockchain as an emerging industry in Canada,
with significant long-term economic and job creation opportunities.
At the same time, the Committee is aware of the context in which it undertook its study.
Cases of alleged fraud on a massive scale, such as the collapse of FTX, have had a
devastating effect on the cryptocurrency industry globally, leading some prominent
media reports to question the industry’s viability.148 At the time of writing, the effects of
these shocks are continuing to reverberate through the industry, and it remains to be
seen what the final outcome will be. But one consequence is already apparent,
regulators around the world are re-evaluating their approach to cryptocurrencies in an
effort to prevent such events from occurring in the future.
From that perspective, the Committee came away generally satisfied with the current
regulatory approach to cryptocurrencies in Canada. Witnesses raised several concerns
related to the current state of regulation, which the Committee share to some extent,
but witnesses also pointed to the regulatory environment as a primary reason why
146 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 21 November 2022, 1245 (Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto, Wealthsimple).
147 INDU, Evidence, 44th Parliament, 1st Session, 27 October 2022, 1615 (Pascal St-Jean, President,
3iQ Corporation).
148 The Economist, “Is this the end of crypto?,” Leaders, 17 November 2022.
40
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
Canadian firms where less affected by recent events and why such events were
significantly less likely to occur in Canada than elsewhere. This suggests that regulations
are doing their job.
Nonetheless, regulatory improvements can, and should, be made to ensure that Canada
continues to be a leader in cryptocurrencies, and the blockchain industry more broadly.
To that end, the Committee believes that a national strategy, similar to those already in
place for other key sectors, is required to clarify the government approach to regulation
and demonstrate Canada’s commitment to the industry.
Recommendation 2
That the government of Canada should, in its efforts to improve consumer protection
and regulatory clarity to the emerging and innovative field of digital assets, be guided by
the principle that individuals’ right to self custody should be protected and that ease of
access to safe and reliable on and off ramps should be defended and promoted.
Recommendation 3
That the Government of Canada, following consultation with the provinces and
stakeholders, establish a national blockchain strategy that clarifies the government’s
policy direction and regulatory approach, and demonstrates support for the industry.
Recommendation 4
That the Government of Canada, with a view to adopting a national blockchain and
distributed ledger strategy:
• call on a group of experts, entrepreneurs, academics and investors, as
well as people in the artificial intelligence industry cluster, to support its
analysis and understanding and help it determine best steps;
• give the group a mandate to:
• set up a platform for information exchange and monitoring;
• carry out analyses to identify the most promising or high-risk areas for
disruption;
• advise the government on promising initiatives; and
• support the government in implementing selected initiatives.
41
Recommendation 5
That the Government of Canada pursue opportunities for international cooperation in
the development of blockchain regulations and policies, including with our major
trading partners.
Recommendation 6
That the Government of Canada conduct innovative pilot projects using distributed
ledgers to help strengthen the ecosystem and recognize up-and-coming businesses.
Recommendation 7
That the Government of Canada create a sandbox where entrepreneurs can test
technologies unhindered by as yet unadopted regulations.
The regulation of stablecoins was put forward by witnesses as one area where the
federal government could play a larger regulatory role and distinguish these products
from other, more speculative, forms of cryptocurrencies. The Committee agrees that
these products have different use cases than other cryptocurrencies and raise unique
regulatory concerns.
Recommendation 8
That the Government of Canada adopt a distinct regulatory approach to stablecoins that
reflects the difference between these products and other cryptocurrencies, and account
for the unique regulatory challenges they present.
Witnesses also pointed to the important role played by cryptocurrency custodians that
provide cold storage services to exchanges and other businesses. With only one
currently operating in Canada, and established under provincial legislation, the
Committee believes that there are growth opportunities that could be promoted
through regulatory reform.
Recommendation 9
That the Government of Canada adopt regulatory changes to promote the establishment
of federally regulated cryptocurrency custodians to meet the demand for cold storage
services from Canadian cryptocurrency firms.
The Committee was concerned to hear from witnesses about the challenges blockchain
entrepreneurs and small businesses face in accessing basic banking and insurance
42
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY:
CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND BEYOND
services. Such challenges present an unnecessary obstacle to innovation that the
government should address.
Recommendation 10
That the Government of Canada adopt measures for access to banking and insurance
services for blockchain firms, including through Crown corporations.
Witnesses highlighted that consumer education can be a valuable tool to preventing
cryptocurrency related fraud and in explaining the advantages of accessing
cryptocurrency markets through regulated Canadian platforms. The Committee believes
that a public awareness campaign focusing on cryptocurrencies could inform consumers
about ways to reduce the risk of fraud while also promoting legitimate Canadian
businesses. This could potentially be achieved by augmenting current information
provided by the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada.149
Recommendation 11
That the Government of Canada establish a public awareness campaign, in consultation
with the provinces and the industry, to educate the public about risks related to
cryptocurrencies and the benefits of accessing cryptocurrency markets through regulated
Canadian entities.
Recommendation 12
That the Government of Canada draw on the previous report on SMEs and launch a
strategic initiative to develop skills and talent and support research.
Outside of cryptocurrencies, the Committee heard compelling testimony regarding the
application of blockchain to other sectors, particularly about the potential to create
more efficient and transparent supply chains. As Canada continues to deal with the
repercussions of supply chain disruptions during the COVID-19 pandemic and seeks
innovative ways to decarbonize the economy, the Committee believes that blockchain
can play an important role in addressing many of the shortcomings of current logistics
and supply chain management.
149 Financial Consumer Agency of Canada, Digital Currency.
43
Recommendation 13
That the Government of Canada investigate ways to promote the adoption of blockchain
technology in supply chains.
Recommendation 14
That the Government of Canada, in collaboration with the Commissioner of Canada
Elections, undertake a study on the new opportunities this technology presents for
electronic voting, consultation, and the modernization of our democratic institutions.
The principle of equity between provinces in the Excise Tax Act aims to ensure fair
treatment among the different provinces of Canada regarding the taxation of goods and
services. The objective is to avoid unfair tax advantages or disadvantages between
provinces. To achieve this equity, the Excise Tax Act establishes a mechanism for
refunding taxes paid by individuals, businesses, and government organizations in one
province where the GST/HST is collected but predominantly used in another province
where the GST/HST is also collected. In summary, the principle of equity between
provinces in the Excise Tax Act aims to ensure that taxpayers are not penalized or
advantaged due to differences in provincial tax rates.
Recommendation 15
That the government of Canada should investigate equity between provinces in the
application of the Excise Tax Act to mining activities to ensure fair taxation.
Recommendation 16
That the government of Canada, in order to foster a competitive digital asset mining
environment and in order to continue to attract investments, should maintain that
digital asset mining constitutes a commercial activity in Canada; and as such adopt a
neutral and equitable position towards this new and growing industry.
44
APPENDIX A
LIST OF WITNESSES
The following table lists the witnesses who appeared before the committee at its
meetings related to this report. Transcripts of all public meetings related to this report
are available on the committee’s webpage for this study.
Organizations and Individuals Date Meeting
3iQ Corporation 2022/10/27 41
Pascal St-Jean, President
As an individual 2022/10/27 41
Matthew Burgoyne, Co-Chair Digital Assets and Blockchain,
Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt LLP
Laure Fouin, Co-Chair Digital Assets and Blockchain, Osler,
Hoskin & Harcourt LLP
Women in Blockchain Canada 2022/10/27 41
Justyna Osawska, Founder
Chainsafe Systems Inc. 2022/11/21 45
Aidan Hyman, Chief Executive Officer
Ether Capital 2022/11/21 45
Brian Mosoff, Chief Executive Officer,
President of Canadian Web3 Council
Wealthsimple 2022/11/21 45
Evan Thomas, Head of Legal,
Wealthsimple Crypto
WonderFi Technologies Inc. 2022/11/21 45
Adam Garetson, General Counsel and Chief Legal Officer
Beatdapp Software Inc. 2022/11/24 46
Pouria Assadipour, Chief Technology Officer
Andrew Batey, Co-Chief Executive Officer
Morgan Hayduk, Co-Chief Executive Officer
Canadian Blockchain Consortium 2022/11/24 46
Koleya Karringten, Executive Director
45
Organizations and Individuals Date Meeting
Mavennet Systems Inc. 2022/11/24 46
Patrick Mandic, Chief Executive Officer
National Digital Asset Exchange Inc. 2022/11/24 46
Tanim Rasul, Chief Operating Officer
Shakepay Inc. 2022/11/24 46
Jean Amiouny, Co-founder and Chief Executive Officer
Bitcoin Coalition of Canada 2022/12/08 50
Brad Mills, Angel Investor
Dapper Labs 2022/12/08 50
Alison Kutler, Head of Government Affairs
Digital Governance Institute 2022/12/08 50
Charlaine Bouchard, Research Chair in Smart Contracts and
Blockchain
Guillaume Déziel, Digital Culture Strategist
Jean-François Gauthier, Chief Executive Officer
Futurity Partners 2022/12/08 50
Tanya Woods, Chief Executive Officer
Hut 8 Mining Corporation 2022/12/08 50
Jaime Leverton, Chief Executive Officer
Information and Communications Technology 2022/12/08 50
Council
Namir Anani, President and Chief Executive Officer
Mastercard 2022/12/08 50
Jesse McWaters, Senior Vice President, Global Head of
Regulatory Advocacy
Collisionless 2023/02/01 55
Dina Mainville, Founder and Principal
46
Organizations and Individuals Date Meeting
Digital Asset Mining Coalition 2023/02/01 55
Sheldon Bennett, Chief Executive Officer, DMG Blockchain
Solutions Inc.
Daniel Brock, Law Partner, Fasken
Geoffrey Morphy, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Bitfarms Ltd.
Tamara Rozansky, Partner, Indirect Tax, Deloitte Canada
Informal Systems Inc. 2023/02/01 55
Ethan Buchman, Chief Executive Officer
Tetra Trust Company 2023/02/01 55
Stephen Oliver, Chief Compliance Officer and Head of
Calgary
47
APPENDIX B
LIST OF BRIEFS
The following is an alphabetical list of organizations and individuals who submitted briefs
to the committee related to this report. For more information, please consult the
committee’s webpage for this study.
Bitcoin Coalition of Canada
Canadian Web3 Council
Electronic Transactions Association
Fasken
Informal Systems Inc.
Shakepay Inc.
49
REQUEST FOR GOVERNMENT RESPONSE
Pursuant to Standing Order 109, the committee requests that the government table a
comprehensive response to this report.
A copy of the relevant Minutes of Proceedings (Meetings Nos. 41, 45, 46, 50, 55, 73 and
77) is tabled.
Respectfully submitted,
Joël Lightbound
Chair
51

================================================================================

Source: pdfs_data/2-CryptoAsset_EO5-done.pdf
U.S. Department of the Treasury
Crypto-Assets:
Implications for Consumers, Investors,
and Businesses
September 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY............................................................................................. 1
Listening to the Public ............................................................................................................................... 4
II. OVERVIEW OF CRYPTO-ASSET MARKETS ECOSYSTEM ................................................. 4
Descriptions of Key Terminology........................................................................................................... 4
Crypto-assets ....................................................................................................................................... 4
Wallets, Keys, and Custody ................................................................................................................ 6
Entities Providing Services or Products in Crypto-asset Markets .............................................. 7
Crypto-asset Platforms ....................................................................................................................... 7
Miners and Validators ......................................................................................................................... 11
Data Aggregators ................................................................................................................................ 12
Traditional Financial Institutions ....................................................................................................... 12
III. CRYPTO-ASSET MARKET TRENDS, USES, AND OPPORTUNITIES ................................. 13
Market Size .............................................................................................................................. 13
Current Uses and Opportunities in Crypto-assets for Consumers, Investors, and Businesses ... 15
Native Crypto-asset Financial Markets, Products, and Services ...................................................... 15
Financial Market and Payment System Infrastructures .................................................................. 19
Other Commercial Activities ............................................................................................................... 22
IV. RISKS AND EXPOSURES FOR CONSUMERS, INVESTORS, AND BUSINESSES ................... 25
Conduct Risks .......................................................................................................................... 26
Fraud, Thef, and Mismanagement .................................................................................................... 26
Information Asymmetry: Lack of Transparency ................................................................................ 29
Operational Risks ................................................................................................................... 33
General Features and Decentralized Governance ............................................................................ 34
Security and Scalability Tradeofs and De-anonymization .............................................................. 35
Peer-to-Peer Verification, Mining Pools, and Validation Incentives.................................................. 35
Risks in Crypto-asset Intermediation ...................................................................................... 37
Resources and Capabilities Risks ....................................................................................................... 37
Custody Risks ....................................................................................................................................... 37
Risk Exposures: Regulatory Non-Compliance and Evolving Market Oversight .......................... 38
Efects of Legal and Regulatory Non-Compliance ............................................................................ 40
Efects of Changes in the Scope and Application of Laws and Regulations ..................................... 40
V. OPPORTUNITIES AND RISKS FOR POPULATIONS VULNERABLE
TO DISPARATE IMPACTS ......................................................................................... 41
Potential Opportunities for Populations Vulnerable to Disparate Impacts ................................ 42
Expanded Access to Financial Services ............................................................................................. 42
Reduced Transaction Costs ................................................................................................................. 44
Potential Opportunities to Build Wealth ............................................................................................45
Potential Risks to Populations Vulnerable to Disparate Impacts ............................................... 46
Market Volatility and Inadequate Disclosures ................................................................................... 46
Targeting ............................................................................................................................................. 47
Privacy and Surveillance Risks ........................................................................................................... 49
VI. RECOMMENDATIONS .................................................................................... 50
CRYPTO-ASSETS:
IMPLICATIONS FOR CONSUMERS, INVESTORS, AND BUSINESSES
Executive Order 14067 on Ensuring Responsible Development of Digital Assets; Section 5(b)(i)—the
implications of developments and adoption of digital assets and changes in financial market and
payment system infrastructures for U.S. consumers, investors, businesses, and for equitable
economic growth.
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Digital asset markets have changed and grown dramatically over the past decade based on estimates
of market capitalization, transaction volumes, and the number and types of assets. Millions of people
globally have some exposure to crypto-assets, including at least 12% of Americans. President Biden’s
Executive Order on Ensuring Responsible Development of Digital Assets (Executive Order) observes
that continued expansion of crypto-based technology could have profound implications for the users
of crypto-assets—namely, consumers, investors, and businesses.
Pursuant to the Executive Order, this report reviews the current crypto-asset markets and trends that
inform the potential opportunities and risks associated with their use. This report focuses on crypto-
assets rather than digital assets more broadly as crypto-assets are currently at the center of the
consumer and investor experience.1 This report also discusses the implications of these opportunities
and risks for consumers, investors, and businesses, with an eye towards those aspects afecting
populations vulnerable to disparate impacts.
Despite the recent expansion in the number and type of crypto-assets and activities, crypto-asset
products are primarily used to trade, lend, and borrow other crypto-assets. Their use in performing
other activities is currently limited and the potential for blockchain technology to transform the
provision of financial services, as espoused by developers and proponents, has yet to materialize.
Nevertheless, it is possible that new products and use cases could emerge.
1 Ensuring Responsible Development of Digital Assets, 87 Fed. Reg. 14143 Section 9(d) (Mar. 9, 2022). The term “digital assets” is defined
by the Executive Order to include cryptocurrencies, stablecoins, and Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs). This report uses the term
“crypto-assets” to refer to all digital assets that are not CBDCs. The terms used in this report also generally reflect the meanings commonly
used by the industry and market participants, with modifications and clarifications as appropriate. While labels may vary, the terms are
also meant to be consistent with the meanings used in other reports mandated by the Executive Order. These are not legal definitions,
unless otherwise noted, and their use in this report does not suggest the instruments, entities, concepts, or activities are subject to
diferent legal or regulatory frameworks than their analogues in traditional financial markets. The objective behind the use of certain
terminology is to emphasize the functions and activities associated with crypto-assets to facilitate an understanding of crypto-asset
markets and the attendant opportunities and risks. The context in which crypto-assets are ofered, sold, transferred, and otherwise used
distinguishes whether a user has the characteristics of a consumer, investor, or business, or some combination of those characteristics.
For example, a person engaging in self-directed trading, holding, or staking of crypto-assets with the expectation of realizing price
appreciation or earning a return would be characterized as an investor. A person using crypto-assets to pay for goods and services might
be characterized, at least in part, as a consumer, and a seller of those goods or services might be characterized as a business. These
characterizations are meant to provide readers with a functional understanding of the ways in which the public interact with crypto-
assets—they are not meant to convey any conclusions regarding the legal classification of the products, activities, or entities involved.
In all cases, users may interact with diferent intermediaries and may experience varying degrees of exposure to crypto-asset products,
services, and technology.
1
In addition, both the existing use cases, and potential opportunities, come with risks, including
conduct and market integrity risks, operational risks, and intermediation risks (i.e., traditional financial
risks that have the potential to manifest in particular ways in the crypto-asset markets). Some risks
are unique to the crypto-asset ecosystem, while others are versions of those experienced in traditional
financial markets that may be heightened when experienced in the crypto-asset ecosystem.
Consumers and investors are exposed to improper conduct in the crypto-asset ecosystem for a variety
of reasons, including a lack of transparency as well as the fact that crypto-assets have relatively novel
and rapidly developing applications. This leads to frequent instances of operational failures, market
manipulation, frauds, thefs, and scams. While the data for populations vulnerable to disparate
impacts remains limited, available evidence suggests that crypto-asset products may present
heightened risks to these groups, and the potential financial inclusion benefits of crypto-assets largely
have yet to materialize.
Consistent with the objective of protecting consumers, investors, and businesses, as well as promoting
responsible development of payment innovations and digital assets, this report recommends that
relevant agencies adopt a multi-part approach to address relevant risks associated with the crypto-
asset sector using their existing authorities. This approach prioritizes the need for urgent action to
protect consumers, investors, and businesses, even as stakeholders continue to debate legislative
proposals on the subject of crypto-asset market regulation. It builds on and complements actions
recommended in other reports pursuant to the Executive Order, including the report under Section
4(b) on the future of money and payments, the report under Section 6(b) on financial stability risks and
regulatory gaps, and the report under Section 7(b) on illicit finance risks.
Recommendation 1: U.S. regulatory and law enforcement agencies should, as appropriate,
vigilantly monitor the crypto-asset sector for unlawful activity, aggressively pursue
investigations, and continue to bring civil and criminal actions to enforce applicable laws with
a particular focus on consumer, investor, and market protection.
Frauds, thefs, and scams have emerged as an especially grave area of concern in crypto-
assets, with estimates of claimed losses reaching billions of dollars and causing material harm
to U.S. consumers, investors, and businesses.
Recommendation 2: U.S. regulatory agencies should continue using their existing authorities
to issue supervisory guidance and rules, as needed, to address current and emerging risks in
crypto-asset products and services for consumers, investors, and businesses. Agencies should
work collaboratively to promote consistent and comprehensive oversight that addresses the
risks identified in this report.
Many U.S. regulatory agencies have already issued guidance or statements related to market
participants within their respective jurisdictions. Such actions benefit consumers and
investors of crypto-assets and entities ofering crypto-asset products and services by reducing
uncertainty for business operations and raising conduct standards to facilitate responsible
innovation.
2
The regulators should also review existing regulations and take appropriate steps to address:
(i) consumer and investor confusion regarding the regulation of crypto-asset products and
services and (ii) gaps in disclosures by market participants promoting crypto-asset products or
services and operational and technical obligations of crypto-asset intermediaries.
Crypto-assets are a new and rapidly developing financial product and activity that can
implicate the jurisdictions and interests of multiple federal and state regulatory and law
enforcement authorities. As such, active collaboration and coordination is necessary to ensure
that crypto-asset products, services, activities, and data are subject to, and in compliance
with, appropriate supervision, oversight, regulation, collection, and disclosure requirements.
In addition to financial risks, the use of public, also known as “permissionless,” blockchains
exposes users to novel forms of operational risks. It is critical that regulators work to
address these risks, including through the expanded application of existing operational risk
management standards, when possible, and enhanced use of supervisory guidance, as well as
alerts to consumers, investors, and businesses to adopt improved diligence tactics.
Recommendation 3: U.S. authorities should work individually and through the Financial
Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC), as appropriate, to ensure that U.S. consumers,
investors, and businesses have access to trustworthy information on crypto-assets.
To help address the extensive risks associated with engagement in crypto-asset markets, as
well as the prevalence of frauds, thefs, scams, and other undesirable practices in the sector,
the FLEC should coordinate and promote consumer and investor education eforts for crypto-
assets, ensuring that consumer- and investor-friendly, trustworthy, and consistent educational
materials are accessible and inclusive.
In light of the lack of data and information on the use of crypto-assets by populations
vulnerable to disparate impacts, FLEC member agencies should also explore using existing
surveys to collect new or additional data that can help facilitate better understanding of the
opportunities and risks facing these populations.
Finally, the FLEC should, where appropriate, engage with industry leaders, academics, and
other relevant parties to promote and coordinate public and private strategies for financial
education outreach to consumers.
3
Listening to the Public
In drafing this report, Treasury benefitted from the wide-ranging insights of members of the
public by issuing a request for comment (RFC). The RFC ofered an opportunity for interested
parties to provide input, data, and recommendations pertaining to the implications of the
development and adoption of digital assets for U.S. consumers, investors, and businesses.
Through the RFC, Treasury received valuable and diverse input from members of the public
across the country that reflected a strong desire for engagement. Treasury received over 260
unique responses with over 280 signatories, including over 90 organizations. The submissions
were made on behalf of over 10,000 member firms and hundreds of thousands of supporters and
individuals. These organizations represent a broad range of stakeholders, including communities
impacted by digital asset mining, technology developers, industry stakeholders, financial
institutions, consumer advocates, and academics.
The data and insights shared through the RFC demonstrated a variety of views among
commenters on the responsible development of digital assets, as well as on the implications
for U.S. consumers, investors, and businesses. Commenters generally expressed their desire
for action with respect to digital assets and supported the coordinated government approach
pursued by the Administration.
Comments submitted in response to the RFC are available at:
www.regulations.gov/document/TREAS-DO-2022-0014-0001
II. OVERVIEW OF CRYPTO-ASSET MARKETS ECOSYSTEM
As directed by the Executive Order, this report discusses the implications of developments and
adoption of crypto-assets and changes in financial market and payment system infrastructures for U.S.
consumers, investors, businesses, as well as implications for equitable economic growth. The crypto-
asset ecosystem is complex, incorporating a number of concepts, entities, and terminology, much of
which may not be entirely uniform. To facilitate and frame the subsequent discussion, this part of the
report describes key terms and concepts and provides an overview of the crypto-asset markets.
Descriptions of Key Terminology
Crypto-assets
The central term in this report is “crypto-assets.” Throughout this report, “crypto-assets” refer broadly
and generically to all types of representations of value or claims in digital form that rely on the use of a
method of distributed ledger technology (DLT),2 excluding central bank digital currencies (CBDCs).3
2 The foundation of the crypto-asset ecosystem is DLT and blockchains. See Section 9(a) of the Executive Order for the relevant definition,
which will be used interchangeably, unless the specific context requires a more precise distinction. Technically, a blockchain is a type of
DLT, while a digital ledger may or may not be a blockchain. See, e.g., MohaMMad Jabed Morshed Chowdhury, alan ColMan, MuhaMMad ashad Kabir,
Jun han & Paul sarda, bloCKChain Versus database: a CritiCal analysis (institute of eleCtriCal and eleCtroniCs engineers, 2018), https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/abstract/document/8456055.
3 Section 9(b) of the Executive Order defines CBDCs as “a form of digital money or monetary value, denominated in the national unit of
account, that is a direct liability of the central bank.” CBDCs are not grouped with other crypto-assets for purposes of this report, and will
be addressed by other reports mandated by the Executive Order. The United States currently does not have a CBDC.
4
Crypto-assets may be original and integral creations of an underlying distributed ledger or blockchain—
sometimes referred to as being “native” to a given network. Alternatively, they may be “tokenized”
representations of assets, including other crypto-assets or assets issued by traditional financial institutions
or entities—such as stocks or bonds—with no initial reliance on DLT. Digital or tokenized representations
of assets are also included in the term “crypto-assets.” Industry and market participants may use multiple
other terms interchangeably with the term crypto-assets, including “coins” and “tokens.”4 References in
this report to coins and tokens should be taken to refer generically to crypto-assets.
Each type of crypto-asset may have diferent convertibility, fungibility, and other attributes.5 While there
is no universally accepted industry nomenclature, there are some common terms for various categories
of crypto-assets, including what are referred to as “utility tokens” and “governance tokens.” Utility
tokens purport to allow users to access products or services on a decentralized platform, discussed more
below, while governance tokens claim to confer certain voting rights to holders regarding decisions to
influence the operation of a decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) or to govern proposed code
changes to other decentralized protocols.6 Other tokens may seek to tokenize traditional financial assets.
Market participants ofen distinguish between “fungible” or “non-fungible” tokens, with each
type being created according to a diferent token standard.7 For fungible tokens, each token unit
must be equal in character and value to other token units, and therefore indistinguishable and
interchangeable. Stablecoins are an example of one type of fungible token. Stablecoins are designed
with the goal of maintaining a stable value, usually in relation to a fiat currency or other assets.8
Non-fungible tokens (NFTs) are crypto-assets that are created using sofware code that is not fungible
with other sofware code. NFTs purport to represent a claim or receipt on an asset or object that
has inherently unique characteristics or that difers from similar assets in some distinguishable way.
Although NFTs are tradeable, they are not interchangeable. Proponents of NFTs claim they have many
potential applications, such as representations of collectible items (for example, art or music), digital
goods, individual identification credentials, access keys, property deeds or titles, or tickets for travel or
events. However, the legal rights aforded by NFTs are unclear and have been subject to litigation.9
4 Another common term is “cryptocurrency.” Section 9(c) of the Executive Order defines cryptocurrencies as referring to “a digital asset,
which may be a medium of exchange, for which generation or ownership records are supported through a distributed ledger technology
that relies on cryptography, such as a blockchain.” Though the term is in general use by the public, a “cryptocurrency” does not have all
the attributes of “real” currency, as defined in 31 C.F.R. § 1010.100(m), including legal tender status.
5 An additional attribute of crypto-assets may be their status as legal tender. A CBDC issued by a central bank would by definition be legal
tender. See the report required by Section 4(b) of the Executive Order (Section 4 Report) for additional discussion of CBDCs.
6 A DAO can be described as a system of administration that aspires to operate according to a set of encoded and transparent rules or smart
contracts. A DAO governance token allows holders to vote on decisions pertaining to the underlying decentralized finance protocol. See
Part IV for a discussion of the risks associated with crypto-asset investments and their governance.
7 On the Ethereum blockchain, for example, fungible tokens can be created according to the ERC-20 Token Standard. See ethereuM, ERC-
20 Token Standard, (May 22, 2022), https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/standards/tokens/erc-20. Non-fungible tokens, however,
can be created according to the ERC-721 Token Standard. See ethereuM, ERC-721 Non-Fungible Token Standard, (Jun. 23, 2022), https://
ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/standards/tokens/erc-721.
8 S ection 9(e) of the Executive Order defines stablecoins as “a category of cryptocurrencies with mechanisms that are aimed at maintaining
a stable value, such as by pegging the value of the coin to a specific currency, asset, or pool of assets or by algorithmically controlling
supply in response to changes in demand in order to stabilize value.” For more information on stablecoins, see, e.g., President’s worKing
grouP on finanCial MarKets, the federal dePosit insuranCe CorPoration & the offiCe of the CoMPtroller of the CurrenCy, rePort on stableCoins (2021),
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/StableCoinReport_Nov1_508.pdf.
9 Juliet M. Moringiello & Christopher K. Odinet, The Property Law of Tokens, florida law reView (Vol. 74, 2022), at 647, https://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3928901.
5
Wallets, Keys, and Custody
Another important concept in the crypto-asset ecosystem is the storage of crypto-assets in a digital
wallet. A digital wallet is a sofware application, piece of hardware, or other device or service that
stores a user’s public and private cryptographic keys, which allow users to interact with one or more
blockchains and, inter alia, to send and receive crypto-assets. A public key is the cryptographic
address that a user shares with others on a blockchain to conduct crypto-asset transactions and must
be paired with a user’s private key to prove ownership of crypto-assets and to authorize transactions.
A private key is the cryptographic password necessary to access the crypto-assets associated with a
wallet address, and therefore must be kept secure.10
A user’s holdings of crypto-assets are not stored in a wallet, but instead are recorded on the
blockchain, and can only be controlled with the user’s private key. A wallet may be compatible with
one specific blockchain (a single-chain wallet), or it may support information from multiple diferent
blockchains (a multi-chain wallet).
Wallets are central to the concept of crypto-asset custody. Custodial wallets, sometimes referred to
as “hosted” wallets, are provided and maintained by an intermediary or third-party service provider.
Custodial wallets generally can be used to facilitate buying, selling, or transferring of crypto-assets,
and are provided by many centralized trading platforms. In contrast, with non-custodial wallets,
sometimes referred to as “un-hosted” wallets, users are responsible for their own wallets and private
keys.11 With either type of wallet, if a user’s private key is lost, forgotten, or destroyed, for example,
there is typically no way to recover access to their crypto-assets.
Digital wallets generally require the use of Internet-connected hardware to receive and transmit the
underlying information. While the accessibility of wallets that are directly connected to the Internet
(sometimes referred to as “hot wallets”) makes them more user-friendly,12 they can also be more
vulnerable to thef and fraud and therefore pose more risks to users. In contrast, “cold wallets”
allow users to store their private keys in a physical storage device or other piece of hardware that
is maintained ofline, making it remote from hacking attempts, but that can be brought online to
conduct transactions. Depending on how it is physically stored, a cold-storage wallet can also be
vulnerable to loss, thef, damage, or destruction. Just like physical wallets can be lost or stolen,
crypto-asset wallets can be hacked, or private keys can be lost or compromised, leading to a loss of
funds or credentials.
A crypto-asset custodian could be a bank, broker-dealer, or other traditional financial institution, or it
could be a financial technology (fintech) company. Custody involves holding the customer’s private
key that controls access to their crypto-asset holdings. Custodians might safekeep crypto-asset
owners’ keys by encrypting them or using a cold storage system (generating and keeping keys ofline)
10 A private key is used as part of an asymmetric cryptographic algorithm such that it, when paired with another unique element of
cryptographic data, is necessary to decrypt data or authorize a transaction. See, e.g., Dylan yaga, Peter Mell, niK roby & Karen sCarfone,
bloCKChain teChnology oVerView 11 (national institute of standards and teChnology, Internal Report-8202, 2018), https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/
nistpubs/ir/2018/NIST.IR.8202.pdf.
11 See Vishal Chawla, Slope wallet provider saved user seed phrases in plain text, Solana security researchers find, the bloCK (Aug. 4, 2022),
https://www.theblock.co/post/161425/slope-wallet-provider-saved-user-seed-phrases-in-plain-text-solana-security-researchers-find.
12 Many hot wallets are free, tend to be easier for consumers and investors to use, and because they are ofen connected to a platform or
“exchange,” they may support a large number of tokens and coins.
6
and may provide direct custody (i.e., manage customers’ crypto-assets themselves) or use a sub-
custodian. As discussed more below, there are questions as to which party (the owner or custodian
or sub-custodian) has ownership or control over crypto-assets held in hosted wallets, which has
important implications in the event of the bankruptcy or receivership of the custodial or sub-custodial
provider.13
Entities Providing Services or Products in Crypto-asset Markets
Many types of entities in the crypto-asset ecosystem provide a variety of services or products to
consumers, investors, and businesses. Many of the early movers in the space are native to the digital
ecosystem and attempt to facilitate the use of services or products that rely on the operation of the
underlying blockchain or distributed ledger technology. Recent entrants include more traditional
financial intermediaries seeking to facilitate their customers’ participation in crypto-asset markets.
Some relevant crypto-asset entities are described below.
Crypto-asset Platforms
Crypto-asset platforms or “exchanges” facilitate an array of activities in various types of crypto-assets,
including coins, tokens, stablecoins, and NFTs.14 These platforms may be, for example, facilities or
systems that bring together multiple buyers and sellers of crypto-assets to trade.15 The number and
prevalence of crypto-asset platforms has grown along with the proliferation of coins and tokens and as
more consumers and investors have entered the space.
Some registered futures or securities exchanges are ofering certain types of registered and regulated
crypto-asset-based products, such as futures contracts or exchange-traded funds, alongside their more
traditional product oferings. Most crypto-asset platforms, however, are relatively new or recently
created facilities and systems formed by technology firms focusing exclusively on crypto-assets. Such
platforms may take the position that they operate outside of existing regimes of market regulation,
which may not be accurate and may create risk for investors and consumers.16
Crypto-asset platforms take two forms, “centralized” and “decentralized,” each of which implicates
distinct opportunities and risks for consumers, investors, and businesses.17
13 See Part IV, Risks and Exposures for Consumers, Investors, and Businesses, for discussions of bankruptcy, safekeeping, and custody of
crypto-assets.
14 Crypto-asset platforms are commonly referred to in the media and by the industry as “exchanges.” In the context of U.S. market
regulation, however, the term “exchange” is generally reserved for certain entities such as national securities exchanges (i.e., stock
exchanges) or designated contract markets (i.e., futures exchanges) that are registered (or exempt from registration by rule or order)
with either or both the Securities and Exchange Commission or the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Unless explicitly noted
otherwise—for example, through use of the phrase “registered exchange”—use of the term exchange in this report does not imply
registration with or regulation by any regulatory authority and, for this reason, use of the more generic term “platform” is preferred. It
should be noted that because an entity is referred to as a “platform” does not mean that it does not have a legal obligation to register as
an exchange with the proper agency or agencies.
15 iosCo, issues, risKs and regulatory Considerations relating to CryPto-asset trading PlatforMs 4 (2020), https://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/
pdf/IOSCOPD649.pdf.
16 S ee, e.g., seC, order instituting Cease-and-desist ProCeedings in the Matter of bloCKfi lending, llC (2022), https://www.sec.gov/litigation/
admin/2022/33-11029.pdf.
17 “Centralized” and “decentralized” are the terms most commonly used by the industry and market participants to distinguish types of
platforms, and therefore are used in this report. However, because the true degree of a platform’s claimed decentralization is ofen low
or unclear, others have suggested distinguishing platforms as either “permissioned” or “permissionless” systems, respectively. See, e.g.,
David Rosenthal, Regulating “Digital Assets,” dshr’s blog (Jul. 27, 2022), https://blog.dshr.org/2022/07/regulating-digital-assets.html.
7
Centralized Platforms (Traditional Venues and Crypto-asset Trading Platforms)
Registered exchanges and other traditional venues in the United States have begun to ofer indirect
exposure to crypto-asset products. Contract markets designated by the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (CFTC) (DCMs) ofer crypto-asset futures and options contracts to enable investors
to hedge positions in, or gain indirect exposure to, crypto-assets.18 Similarly, national securities
exchanges registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) ofer investors indirect
exposure to crypto-assets by trading securities such as stocks of public companies whose businesses
are related to crypto-assets. Other types of products trade on over-the-counter venues.19
Registered exchanges and other traditional venues carry fewer of the risks seen in other crypto-asset
trading platforms and decentralized finance because they, and their members and intermediaries,
are registered, regulated, overseen by relevant federal agencies, and subject to numerous regulatory
requirements. The requirements for exchanges, their members and other intermediaries include,
among other things:
(I) Conducting customer identification and verification, recordkeeping and reporting obligations,
and obligations to comply with requirements regarding anti-money laundering countering the
financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) and the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA);
(II) Providing secure custody of customer assets;
(III) Ensuring trade execution and settlement;
(IV) Maintaining and complying with rulebooks;
(V) Reporting to regulators and the public; and
(VI) Complying with disclosure obligations and business conduct standards.
Registered exchanges are also self-regulatory organizations (SROs) and as such have certain
responsibilities for promoting market integrity by setting and enforcing industry and membership
rules and standards.20
Centralized crypto-asset platforms (CEXs) facilitate, as a primary service, direct (or spot) trading of
crypto-assets by users.21 Some CEXs also facilitate trading in crypto-asset based derivatives, such as
futures and options. CEXs may require users to undergo customer verification. They also are the only
part of the crypto-asset ecosystem that allows users to deposit U.S. dollars. CEXs require users to
deposit crypto-assets or fiat currency into an account on the platform before being eligible to trade,
and they provide a means for consumers and investors to cash out their crypto-asset holdings back
18 In December 2017, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) and Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) launched futures contracts
on bitcoin (though CBOE stopped ofering bitcoin futures contracts in 2019) and later other exchanges (e.g., ICE Futures US, and FTX US
Derivatives) began ofering crypto-assets futures contracts.
19 There are exchange-traded funds (ETFs), registered with the SEC, that trade in CME’s bitcoin futures contracts, but to date, the SEC has not
approved any of the many applications it has received for a spot crypto-asset exchange traded product.
20 Apart from the exchanges, there are industry-wide SROs, including the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) and the National
Futures Association (NFA). Exchange members are generally subject to FINRA or NFA rules.
21 Other sources or authorities may use diferent labels to refer to entities that this report refers to as CEXs. For example, the iosCo uses
the term “centralized crypto-asset trading platforms.” See, e.g., iosCo, iosCo deCentralized finanCe rePort (2022), https://www.iosco.org/
library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD699.pdf.
8
into fiat currency. As a result, CEXs are sometimes referred to as the “on-ramps” and “of-ramps” in the
crypto-asset ecosystem.
Currently, U.S.-based CEXs that facilitate trading in spot crypto-asset transactions generally operate as
money services businesses (MSBs) under the regulations of Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network (FinCEN) and are therefore subject to AML/CFT obligations.22 CEXs may also hold state
money transmission licenses and may be subject to, among other requirements and depending on the
states in which they operate, permissible investment requirements, reporting requirements, bonding
requirements, and inspection by state regulatory agencies. However, the consumer and investor
protections ofered by these state-based jurisdictions vary and are typically fewer and less extensive
than federal laws applicable to securities and derivatives markets and products or consumer financial
products and services.
Simply registering with FinCEN or states as an MSB or money transmitter does not absolve a CEX of
its other relevant legal obligations. Any activity with U.S. residents involving crypto-assets that are
derivatives or securities falls under the jurisdiction of the CFTC or SEC. For example, if a CEX ofers
trading of crypto-assets that are securities and operates as an exchange, as defined under federal
securities laws, then the platform must either register with the SEC as a national securities exchange
or qualify for an exemption from registration.23 Similarly, a CEX that ofers a trading facility for U.S.
customers to trade futures, options, or swaps referencing crypto-assets that are commodities must
register with the CFTC as a designated contract market or swap execution facility.
Unlike registered exchanges, CEXs generally have no exchange member firms or other intermediaries
and have no self-regulatory functions. A CEX itself is ofen the intermediary between buyers and sellers
of crypto-assets and typically provides many, or all, of the services necessary to trade crypto-assets
(e.g., trading, custody,24 and transfers) for both crypto-assets and fiat currencies.25 As discussed in Part
IV, the risks associated with CEXs that are not in compliance with U.S. laws and regulations, or that
may not be regulated, are significant. Whether a CEX is properly registered, and the associated risks
of transacting with CEXs compared to registered exchanges, therefore carries important implications
for customers using CEXs to trade crypto-assets, many of whom may be confused or misled by a CEX’s
marketing and promotional materials.
22 FinCEN published interpretive guidance in March 2013 stating an administrator or exchanger of “convertible virtual currency” is an MSB
under FinCEN’s regulations, specifically a money transmitter, with limited exceptions. See finCen, Application of FinCEN’s Regulations
to Persons Administering, Exchanging, or Using Virtual Currencies, (Mar. 18, 2013), https://www.fincen.gov/sites/default/files/shared/FIN-
2013-G001.pdf. CEXs are also subject to sanctions imposed by Treasury’s Ofice of Foreign Assets Control and other U.S. government
agencies, as well as other types of government-imposed restrictions that apply to U.S. persons, such as export controls.
23 S ee seC, Statement on Potentially Unlawful Online Platforms for Trading Crypto-assets, (Mar. 7, 2018), https://www.sec.gov/news/public-
statement/enforcement-tm-statement-potentially-unlawful-online-platforms-trading. An SEC-registered trading platform would be
exempt from FinCEN’s MSB regulations, pursuant to 31 CFR 1010.100(f)(8)(ii). However, to date, no CEX or other crypto-asset platform
has registered with the SEC as a national securities exchange, and some CEXs operating today might indeed be unregistered exchanges
under the federal securities laws. Many CEXs claim there is “legal uncertainty” as to the registration and regulatory status of CEXs under
U.S. securities and derivatives laws and are not currently registered, while relying on MSB and state money transmission licenses in order
to operate in the United States.
24 S uch custodial arrangements, however, do not involve the same types of customer protection rules—such as segregation and
permissible investment requirements, or any type of insurance—that apply to traditional financial intermediaries.
25 F or example, a CEX may ofer the following services to facilitate user access and trading: trading spot and derivatives on multiple coins
and tokens, including stablecoins; custody services for crypto-assets; payment, exchange, and other agent services; loan origination and
trading; insurance; and access to decentralized crypto-asset platforms. In addition, some CEXs have expanded their services to include
other related activities, such as crypto-asset mining.
9
Decentralized Platforms (DeFi Protocols)
Decentralized crypto-asset platforms or protocols are a prominent part of the crypto-asset
ecosystem. The term “decentralized” commonly refers to the provision of financial products, services,
arrangements, and activities that use DLT in an efort to disintermediate and decentralize legacy
ecosystems by eliminating the need for certain traditional financial intermediaries and centralized
institutions.26 Decentralized platforms include what are referred to as decentralized exchanges (DEXs)
and other types of platforms referred to as decentralized finance (DeFi) protocols. 27
Like centralized platforms (both traditional exchanges, with respect to crypto-asset derivatives and
securities, and CEXs), decentralized platforms ofer users the ability to trade crypto-assets and to
engage in a variety of other crypto-asset-based activities, such as lending and borrowing crypto-
assets. Decentralized platforms typically do not conduct customer verification on their users, nor do
they implement other AML/CFT measures. Like many centralized platforms for crypto-assets, or CEXs,
DeFi platforms or protocols—which are designed to enable peer-to-peer market transactions, without
a centralized intermediary controlling users’ funds or access—also are not currently registered with the
SEC or CFTC and therefore may be operating in non-compliance with U.S. law and regulation.
Proponents of DeFi protocols see the purported absence of intermediation as a benefit that allows
users to make trades and move their assets wherever and whenever they want, without having to wait
for bank transfers or pay bank fees. However, as others have observed, the miners and validators that
are critical to the execution of any transaction on DeFi trading or lending platforms play an important
intermediation role.28 Further, a lack of industry-recognized operational control frameworks, conduct
standards, or other self-policing mechanisms ofen leaves users exposed to a number of risks specific
to DeFi protocols,29 as well as some of the same risks as with unregistered or unregulated CEXs. As
a result, it is important for investors, consumers, and other market participants to be made aware
of the fact that they are exposed to greater risks when engaging with DEXs.30 See Part IV for further
discussion of risks in DeFi.
Many DeFi protocols claim not to rely on a formal centralized governance structure. Specifically,
organizers of DeFi protocols aspire to operate autonomously, with little or no governance structure.
In practice, many DeFi protocols adopt governance elements. For instance, the organizers of a DeFi
protocol may employ a DAO in which (i) participants may have the ability to maintain direct real-time
control of contributed funds and (ii) governance rules may be formalized, automated, and enforced
26 See IOSCO, supra note 21.
27 Currently, there is no generally accepted definition of “DeFi,” or what makes a product, service, arrangement, or activity “decentralized.”
Further, as noted with respect to CEXs, other sources or authorities may use diferent labels for entities referred to in this report as DEXs
or DeFi protocols. For example, because DeFi protocols use smart contracts in some part of the application, DeFi participants sometimes
refer to such protocols as “decentralized applications” or “dApps.”
28 r aPhael auer, Jon frost & Jose Maria Vidal Pastor, Miners as interMediaries: extraCtable Value and MarKet ManiPulation in CryPto and defi (banK for
international settleMents (bis), BIS Bulletin No. 58, 2022), https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull58.pdf.
29 The term “decentralized finance” should be viewed critically as it may not represent accurately the reality in decentralized markets today.
See Sirio Aramonte, Wenqian Huang & Andreas Schrimpf, DeFi Risks and the Decentralisation Illusion, bis (BIS Quarterly Review, Dec.
2021), https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt2112b.pdf. Although most activities in the decentralized crypto-assets space have corollaries
in traditional finance, these activities are—for the most part—currently limited to facilitating yield-enhancing, speculative, and leveraged
activities in crypto-assets. See iosCo, supra note 21.
30 See Caroline Crenshaw, DeFi Risks, Regulations, and Opportunities, international Journal of bloCKChain law (Vol. 1, 2021), at 4, 7,
https://gbbcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/IJBL-1.pdf.
10
using smart contracts or other sofware.31 For example, in exchange for depositing a crypto-asset, a
protocol smart contract may create new tokens that are assigned to the wallet address of the person
who sent the asset. The number of tokens created may be proportional to the amount of crypto-
asset transferred. The new tokens representing the initial crypto-asset deposit can then be efectively
rehypothecated—lent out or used as collateral on other platforms. The protocol may separately issue
reward tokens on occasion for being a user of the platform, and those reward tokens in turn may be
governance tokens that grant its holder certain voting and ownership rights. Holders of a suficient
number of governance tokens may be able to raise governance or procedural topics (e.g., certain
changes to the code) that may be implemented if a suficient number of users vote for the proposal.
Within this framework, decentralization does not necessarily equate to wide distribution, and the
ownership of voting rights and tokens many governance tokens can be highly concentrated.32
There are possibly thousands of DeFi protocols, though only a small number experience significant
user activity. One frequently cited data aggregator reportedly tracks more than 1,800 diferent DeFi
protocols across 27 diferent categories with a combined “total value locked” (or “TVL”) of $86.0 billion
as of August 19, 2022.33 The most prominent category of DeFi protocols includes those that facilitate
the trading of crypto-assets (i.e., DEXs), reportedly with 516 separate platforms with a combined $26.3
billion in TVL.34
In contrast to the type of trade matching typically carried out on centralized platforms (such as central
limit order books), some DEXs rely on liquidity pools and automated market-making enabled by smart
contracts to facilitate trading and other types of services. Afer DEXs, lending and borrowing DeFi
protocols reportedly have the greatest TVL at $17.3 billion across 164 separate platforms; there are
also reportedly 338 protocols that pay users a reward for staking crypto-assets on the platform—so-
called “yield” protocols—with over $8.4 billion TVL.35
Miners and Validators
Mining is the process of using a consensus mechanism to verify and add transactions to a distributed
ledger in exchange for newly minted crypto-assets that compensate participants in the consensus
mechanism.36 Miners or validators are a decentralized network of actors who compete to add
new entries, or “blocks,” to a public ledger or blockchain. These actors typically use a consensus
31 See seC, rePort of inVestigation Pursuant to seCtion 21(a) of the seCurities exChange aCt of 1934: the dao (2017), https://www.sec.gov/litigation/
investreport/34-81207.pdf.
32 One recent analysis found that among several major DAOs, less than 1% of token holders controlled 90% of the voting power. See
Chainalysis, Dissecting the DAO: Web3 Ownership is Surprisingly Concentrated, (Jun. 27, 2022), https://blog.chainalysis.com/reports/web3-
daos-2022. Also, the amount of governance tokens a user must either own or be delegated to raise new proposals may be extremely
high.
33 d efi llaMa, TVL Rankings, https://defillama.com. TVL, an industry reported metric, is the amount of user funds deposited or “locked” in
a DeFi protocol, and is used as a measure to gauge the size of the DeFi market or the degree of adoption or acceptance by users. TVL
information is not audited or verified, may double-count funds, and therefore may not be a reliable metric. See iMf, global finanCial
stability rePort: CoVid-19, CryPto, and CliMate 42 (2021), https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2021/10/12/global-financial-
stability-report-october-2021.
34 d efi llaMa, supra note 33.
35 Id.
36 While blockchains are foundational to the crypto-asset ecosystem, not every transaction in, activity relating to, or ownership of crypto-
assets is reflected in a distributed ledger. Though transactions, activities, and balances may take place and be recorded on a blockchain
(referred to as “on-chain”), many occur or are maintained “of-chain,” sometimes through third parties or intermediaries.
11
mechanism—such as proof-of-work (PoW) or proof-of-stake (PoS), depending on the design or
architecture of the blockchain—to carry out the work of updating a blockchain. Miners typically are
compensated for this work by receiving fees, called “gas fees” in the case of the Ethereum blockchain,
and in some cases, “block rewards,” both of which are paid or issued in the blockchain’s native token.37
As with DeFi ownership, mining activities may be concentrated, and indeed have become increasingly
dominated in recent years by organizations with large-scale operations. 38 Some of the largest miners
are public companies.
Data Aggregators
The crypto-asset ecosystem generates a vast amount of information. Accurate and reliable data is
critical to maintaining market integrity, including identifying potential money launderers and terrorist
financiers, market manipulators, fraudsters, and other actors attempting to conduct illicit financial
activity or take advantage of consumers, investors, and businesses. Crypto-asset and DeFi markets
operate globally on a 24/7 basis, producing a constant flow of data about transactions, coin and
token prices, trading volumes, and other financial metrics and activities taking place on- and of-
chains. Where assets or transactions occur on public blockchains, such as through DEXs or other DeFi
protocols, the information is recorded on the underlying ledger and is in theory completely open and
transparent to all market participants.39
Data pertaining to of-chain activity is extremely limited and subject to voluntary disclosure by trading
platforms and protocols. As a result, the quality of of-chain data is less verifiable, and coin and
token prices (and other data) may difer markedly between platforms.40 Unlike traditional registered
exchanges, CEXs and DeFi protocols operating today either are not complying with, or are not subject
to, obligations to report accurate trade information periodically to regulators or to ensure the quality,
consistency, and reliability of their public trade data.
Traditional Financial Institutions
Traditional financial institutions such as banking institutions, broker-dealers, investment advisers,
futures commission merchants (FCMs), and clearinghouses are increasingly expressing interest to
enter the crypto-asset ecosystem and seeking ways to provide crypto-asset services to consumers,
investors, and businesses in response to growing demand. Traditional intermediaries are exploring
a range of services relying on DLT, such as providing custody for crypto-assets, holding reserves for
37 “Gas” is a term associated with the Ethereum blockchain that refers to a unit of payment for the computational efort of conducting
transactions or smart contract functions. Gas is measured in small bits called “gwei,” with each gwei equaling 0.000000001 (one-billionth)
ETH. The “gas price” on the network at any given moment is driven by demand, transaction congestion, and other factors.
38 See, e.g., igor MaKaroV & antoinette sChoar, bloCKChain analysis of the bitCoin MarKet (national bureau of eConoMiC researCh (nber), Working Paper
No. 29396, 2021), https://www.nber.org/papers/w29396. The report found that the top 10% of miners control 90% of the Bitcoin mining
capacity, and the top 0.1%—about 50 miners—control 50% of mining capacity.
39 While this transparency benefits the entire ecosystem, ordinary consumers and investors may themselves benefit less directly depending
upon whether they are technically able to access, process, and comprehend raw blockchain data.
40 As recently as 2021, researchers estimated that over 70% of all crypto-assets volumes were wash trades, with such “fabricated volumes”
serving to improve exchange ranking and temporarily distorting prices. See, e.g., lin williaM Cong, xi li, Ke tang & yang yan, CryPto wash
trading (soCial sCienCe researCh networK, 2021), http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3530220.
12
stablecoin issuers, facilitating payments,41 and expanding credit and investments in native crypto-
asset companies.42 Some banking institutions are specializing in the crypto-assets space and
ofering clients services such as lending (providing fiat loans collateralized by crypto-assets), staking
(placement of coins and tokens in protocols or pools to earn interest), and governance services
(allowing participation in on-chain governance from within the institution’s user interfaces).
III. CRYPTO-ASSET MARKET TRENDS, USES, AND OPPORTUNITIES
While features of crypto-asset projects and technologies vary significantly, a common feature
attributed to the use of blockchain technology is a reduced reliance on intermediaries, including the
possibility to facilitate the secure transfer of value between parties without the use of a mutually
trusted third party.43 The distributed model of record keeping and computing also introduces the
possibility of more direct peer-to-peer and fully automated transactions, which together may produce
future benefits associated with: faster settlement of financial transactions; new financial products; and
direct access to asset networks by individual consumers, investors, and businesses. To date, however,
competing technologies, applications, and paradigms for adoption have produced a patchwork
of systems that have yet to deliver, separately or collectively, on many of the promised benefits
for consumers, investors, and businesses, including complete disintermediation or satisfactorily
addressing some of the drawbacks of moving away from an intermediated model of finance.44 These
and other rapidly evolving dynamics are likely to impact the degree to which these products and
services are more widely adopted over time.
Market Size
On January 1, 2020, on the eve of the COVID-19 pandemic, the market capitalization of Bitcoin—the
first and largest crypto-asset by price and market capitalization—was about $130.6 billion, down
from the previous high of about $320.6 billion in December 2017.45 During the pandemic, the market
41 The OCC has instructed that before engaging in these crypto-assets activities, a national bank or federal savings association should
notify its supervisor of its intent and receive notification of its supervisor’s non-objection. See, e.g., oCC, Chief Counsel’s Interpretation
Clarifying: (1) Authority of a Bank to Engage in Certain Cryptocurrency Activities; and (2) Authority of the OCC to Charter a National Trust
Bank, (Interpretive Letter No. 1179, Nov. 18, 2021), https://www.occ.gov/topics/charters-and-licensing/interpretations-and-actions/2021/
int1179.pdf. The FDIC has requested all FDIC-supervised institutions that are considering engaging in crypto-related activities to notify
the FDIC of their intent and to provide all necessary information that would allow the FDIC to engage with the institution regarding
related risks. See FDIC, Notification of Engaging in Crypto-Related Activities, (Apr. 7, 2022), https://www.fdic.gov/news/financial-institution-
letters/2022/fil22016.html#letter.
42 See Carla Mozee, These 13 Banks Have Invested The Most In Crypto And Blockchain To Date, MarKets insider, (Aug. 15, 2021), https://markets.
businessinsider.com/news/currencies/13-top-banks-investing-cryptocurrency-blockchain-technology-funding-blockdata-bitcoin-2021-8.
43 See, e.g., MiChael Casey, Jonah Crane, gary gensler, siMon Johnson & neha narula, the iMPaCt of bloCKChain teChnology on finanCe: a Catalyst for
Change, (international Center for Monetary and banKing studies, 2018). However, others note that “a review of blockchain research suggests
that true disintermediation might be possible in some finance areas but not all,” and that “despite Bitcoin’s disintermediation from
conventional financial infrastructure, it is still important to build up a new infrastructure with intermediation to allow the conversion
between Bitcoin and fiat currencies to occur.” See Cynthia Weiyi Cai, Disruption of financial intermediation by FinTech: a review on
crowdfunding and blockchain, aCCounting and finanCe (Vol. 58 Issue 4, Dec. 12, 2018), at 965-992,
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/acfi.12405.
44 C ynthia Weiyi Cai, supra note 43. See also Moxie Marlinspike, My first impressions of web3, Moxie (Jan. 7, 2022),
https://moxie.org/2022/01/07/web3-first-impressions.html.
45 A chief concern with these market measures is the accuracy and reliability of the data available given the lack of a standardized
reporting regime. See, e.g., Javier Paz, More Than Half of All Bitcoin Trades Are Fake, forbes (Aug. 26, 2022), https://www.forbes.com/sites/
javierpaz/2022/08/26/more-than-half-of-all-bitcoin-trades-are-fake/?sh=fe4e626681f7.
13
capitalization of Bitcoin increased again, reaching its all-time high of nearly $1.3 trillion in November
2021, before declining significantly thereafer.46 As of August 20, 2022, the market capitalization of
Bitcoin is around $404.8 billion.47 Over the same period, there has been seemingly exponential growth
in the number of coins and tokens, with an estimated handful of crypto-assets in 2013, to more than
2,800 by the end of 2019, to nearly 10,400 as of early 2022, according to one source.48 The aggregate
market capitalization of all crypto-assets also experienced expansive growth and volatility: from just
under $200 billion in January 2020 to approximately $2.9 trillion in November 2021, before falling to
less than $1.0 trillion in June 2022.49 The chart below illustrates this trend.
At the same time, the number of centralized and decentralized platforms available to consumers,
investors, and businesses has proliferated, ofering the possibility to engage in an ever-changing
variety of financial, as well as non-financial, activities. Diferent types of crypto-assets, including
cryptocurrencies and other native fungible coins and tokens, NFTs, and tokenized forms of traditional
assets, have developed at diferent rates.
46 C oinMarKetCaP, Bitcoin: Historical Data for Bitcoin, https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/bitcoin/historical-data.
47 I d.
48 statista, Number of cryptocurrencies worldwide from 2013 to February 2022, (Mar. 22, 2022), https://www.statista.com/statistics/863917/
number-crypto-coins-tokens. Other sources identify many more coins and tokens. For example, Etherscan lists over 500,000 ERC-20
tokens, though most may not trade and do not have meaningful market values. See ethersCan, Token Tracker, https://etherscan.io/tokens.
Another source estimates that in DeFi there are over 1.7 million tokens, of which approximately 10% have been identified by the source to
be scams. See toKensniffer, https://tokensnifer.com.
49 CoinMarKetCaP, Global Cryptocurrency Charts: Total Cryptocurrency Market Cap, https://coinmarketcap.com/charts. See also Josh
Zumbrun, Why Crypto’s Market Cap Never Booms, or Busts, as Much as You Think, the wall street Journal (Aug. 5, 2022), https://www.wsj.
com/articles/why-cryptos-market-cap-never-booms-or-busts-as-much-as-you-think-11659691802. The article suggests that most
market capitalization measures are overestimates because they include crypto-assets that are unrecoverable due to loss of keys and
other factors.
14
Current Uses and Opportunities in Crypto-assets for Consumers, Investors, and Businesses
The current uses of native crypto-assets and tokenized traditional assets are limited. These can be
grouped into three broad categories, including: (i) crypto-asset-based alternatives to traditional
financial products and services; (ii) financial market and payment system infrastructures; and (iii)
potential cases for other consumer and commercial uses by individuals and businesses (e.g., NFTs,
gaming, records, identity, supply chain management). Specific uses, which are in various stages of
development or implementation, include:
• Financial markets, products, and services that use native crypto-assets consist primarily of trading,
lending, and collateral activities of other crypto-assets and are generally speculative in nature;
• Limited instances of use as a medium of exchange for goods and services;
• Market and payment system infrastructures for traditional assets using permissioned blockchains;
and
• Technological innovations to transform commercial activities to attract more significant adoption,
most of which are at the pilot stage and face obstacles.
The following discussion addresses relevant issues with both native and tokenized use cases, as well as
potential opportunities, including the role of technological innovation. While the discussion contains
examples of potential opportunities using blockchain technology, crypto-asset transactions using CEXs
at present generally occur of-chain rather than on-chain.50 It should also be noted that technologists
disagree about the value of certain use cases, and the potential utility of blockchains more generally.51
Native Crypto-asset Financial Markets, Products, and Services
Native crypto-asset activities take a variety of forms. As with other crypto-asset-related activities,
the form of the activity may be less relevant than its underlying function.52 As noted above, the
most predominant use cases to date consist of trading, lending, and investing, although there are
eforts underway to increase the scale of other consumer use cases. Adoption by U.S. adults of
cryptocurrency to-date—which has been growing—has primarily been for investing purposes, with
the adoption for payments or remittances remaining limited. According to the Survey of Household
Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) conducted by the Federal Reserve in October and November
2021, 12% of adults in the United States held or used cryptocurrencies in the prior year,53 substantially
50 See Sirio Aramonte, Wenqian Huang & Andreas Schrimpf, supra note 29, at 26.
51 See Letter in Support of Responsible Fintech Policy, dated Jun. 1, 2022, https://concerned.tech.
52 See Jay Clayton, Chairman, SEC, Statement on “Virtual Currencies: The Oversight Role of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
and the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission” at 5 (Feb. 6, 2018), https://www.banking.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Clayton%20
Testimony%202-6-18.pdf. Former Chairman Clayton noted that “simply calling something a ‘currency’ or a currency-based product does
not mean that it is not a security.”
53 b oard of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, eConoMiC well-being of u.s. households in 2021 45 (2022) https://www.federalreserve.gov/
publications/files/2021-report-economic-well-being-us-households-202205.pdf.
15
higher than results from 2015, when a private survey found that 1% of U.S. adults said they had ever
collected, traded, or used the individual cryptocurrency Bitcoin.54
Trading
Trading is currently the most common activity in the crypto-asset ecosystem. For example, as with
traditional trading markets, crypto-asset trading markets include short-term traders, arbitrageurs, and “buy
and hold” investors hoping to profit from long-term price appreciation. A large share of trading volume is
in stablecoins, which are used as collateral on crypto-asset platforms and protocols, and which facilitate
trading and lending of other crypto-assets, borrowing, and other activities. Traders engage both in spot
market trading of crypto-assets, as well as crypto-asset-based derivatives such as futures and options.
Since 2020, the market for crypto-asset-based derivatives has grown significantly and now accounts for 69%
of total crypto-asset volumes, outpacing the spot market.55 According to reports, institutional investors,
rather than retail investors, comprise a majority of the trading activity in crypto-asset markets.56
Both CEXs and DEXs generate revenues through trading fees, which can vary significantly among
diferent platforms. Further, trading on DEXs generally includes gas fees to compensate miners
and validators for contributing the computing and storage resources necessary to verify and write
transactions to a blockchain. Gas fees add to the costs of transacting and can vary widely depending
on the complexity of a transaction and the congestion on the blockchain.
Participation in DEX and DeFi protocols’ liquidity pools, whereby users pool and lock their assets in the
platform’s smart contract, relies on a profit-sharing model.57 The assessment of fees, the transparency
of trading standards on platforms, liquidity pools’ operations, suficiency of cybersecurity protections,
and adequacy of disclosures all subject users to significant risks. These risks are discussed in more
detail in Part IV.
Lending, Borrowing, Staking, and Collateral
CEXs or DEXs may also ofer other yield-generating activities, including lending and borrowing
and staking services, sometimes referred to by platforms and users as “yield farming.” Numerous
54 Andrew Perrin, 16% of Americans say they have ever invested in, traded or used cryptocurrency, Pew researCh Center (Nov. 11, 2021), https://
www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/11/11/16-of-americans-say-they-have-ever-invested-in-traded-or-used-cryptocurrency. This Pew
Research Center survey, conducted in September 2021, found that 16% of U.S. adults say they personally have invested in, traded or
otherwise used crypto-assets like Bitcoin or Ether. An updated survey carried out in July 2022 shows that this finding is unchanged from
September 2021. See Michelle Faverio & Navid Massarat, 46% of Americans who have invested in cryptocurrency say it’s done worse than
expected, Pew researCh Center (Aug. 23, 2022), https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2022/08/23/46-of-americans-who-have-invested-
in-cryptocurrency-say-its-done-worse-than-expected.
55 See CryPtoCoMPare, exChange reView 13 (2022), https://www.cryptocompare.com/media/40485073/exchange_review_july_vf-1.pdf. Most
of this activity currently is taking place on non-U.S. CEXs and DeFi protocols. Nevertheless, derivatives trading typically involves the use
of leverage—i.e., the practice of placing outsize bets with only a small amount of money upfront, ofen involving margin or borrowed
funds—to amplify returns. But leverage can also work against traders when prices decline, by leading to rapid liquidation of their
positions and collateral.
56 See George Steer, Did Institutional Investors Crash the Crypto Party?, finanCial tiMes (May 13, 2022), https://www.f.com/content/12b80e7f-
047d-4273-8766-226b5d91a1fc.
57 Liquidity pools in turn rely on automated market-maker (AMM) protocols which use preset mathematical equations (e.g., x*y=k, where
x and y represent the values of tokens in a liquidity pair and k is a constant) to ensure the ratio of assets in the liquidity pools remains
balanced and determine prices based on trading volumes. For a discussion of AMMs, including certain features of AMMs that may expose
liquidity-takers to market manipulation on DEXs, see Sirio Aramonte, Wenqian Huang & Andreas Schrimpf, supra note 29, at 34-35.
16
centralized crypto-asset lending platforms ofer products that are marketed as forms of high-yield
savings or deposit-like products in diferent forms under which users can lend out their crypto-assets.
In these scenarios, crypto-assets serve as the sole source of collateral used to facilitate transactions
involving other crypto-assets.58 Platforms may attract users by promising to pay returns that are
far greater than those ofered by traditional banks, and inappropriately use bank-like terms such as
“savings account,” “deposit,” or annual percentage yield (APY) and other promotional tactics that can
obscure the associated risks.
The source of the high yields on these types of products is not entirely clear, but crypto-asset firms purport
to generate them using some combination of (i) interest earned by the platforms on short-term loans
of these crypto-assets; (ii) returns gained by investing customers’ crypto-assets in other crypto-assets,
in traditional financial instruments, such as securities, or in other centralized or decentralized yield-
generating projects; (iii) staking fees or rewards granted to those staking crypto-assets in order to be used
toward validation in Proof-of-Stake consensus mechanisms used on certain blockchain protocols; or (iv)
other income generated through holding certain crypto-assets (e.g., initial holders of new coins).
Users may also borrow through centralized platforms, where loans of U.S. dollars or crypto-assets
are available without credit checks and collateralized by users’ holdings of crypto-assets.59 Users are
ofen borrowing to exploit pricing disparities among the various crypto-assets and trading platforms.
Lending platforms generally limit the amount that users can borrow to some fraction—e.g., 50%—of
the value of their collateral. While there is little transparency into the activity in the form of verifiable
reporting on the number of borrowers, the sizes of loans, and the frequency of margin calls and
liquidations, lending and borrowing activity appeared to have been growing through the end of 2021.
Activity has appeared to decline through the first half of 2022.60
Investors and consumers may also engage in lending and staking through decentralized markets
and intermediaries. According to one estimate, DeFi protocols developed for lending and other
yield farming activities appear to account for a little over one-third of the TVL in all DeFi platforms.61
Lending participants expect to receive new tokens issued by a DeFi protocol, representing their pro
rata claim on the protocol’s lending pool, which they are able to redeem later for the assets originally
placed plus accrued interest. Lending participants also may earn reward tokens for providing liquidity,
which are ofen governance tokens issued by the protocol that may increase the expected return
beyond accrued interest.
58 Because loans generally are disbursed in digital coins or tokens and are secured by other crypto-assets, the self-referential nature of
these activities may present wrong-way risks, meaning that a party’s credit risk is correlated with the value of the underlying asset. See,
e.g., sirio araMonte, sebastian doerr, wenqian huang & andreas sChriMPf, defi lending: interMediation without inforMation? 1-2 (bis, BIS Bulletin No.
57, 2022), https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull57.pdf.
59 Though credit assessments typically are not required for borrower loan approvals, more and more centralized crypto-asset lending
platforms are carrying out certain “know your customer” or KYC diligence on customers to comply with anti-money laundering and other
illicit financial activities laws.
60 This may be due, at least in part, to the fact that several prominent platforms were faced with enforcement actions from state or federal
regulators, while others experienced liquidity strains due to a broad decline in crypto-asset prices, leading more than one platform to
place limits on or altogether suspend customer withdrawals. See, e.g., seC, BlockFi Agrees to Pay $100 Million in Penalties and Pursue
Registration of its Crypto Lending Product, (Feb. 14, 2022), https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2022-26; MacKenzie Sigalos, From $25
billion to $167 million: How a major crypto lender collapsed and dragged many investors down with it, CnbC (Jul. 18, 2022), https://www.
cnbc.com/2022/07/17/how-the-fall-of-celsius-dragged-down-crypto-investors.html.
61 DeFi DEXs currently account for just over a quarter of all TVL in DeFi, while all other protocol categories combined make up the rest. See
defi llaMa, Protocol Categories, https://defillama.com/categories.
17
Participants may also borrow crypto-assets from DeFi lending protocols. Like centralized lending
platforms, DeFi lending protocols generally permit users to borrow only a fraction of their crypto-
asset collateral (i.e., the loans are “over-collateralized,” in some cases up to 150% of the loan), users
who can provide the required collateral can participate in transactions on the platform, and there
is no credit assessment on borrowers. Borrowers are typically subject to a collateralization ratio
(sometimes called a “health factor”62) which, if breached, will lead to their loan being liquidated and a
portion of their collateral being seized, inclusive of a liquidation fee. These liquidation fees are ofen
not disclosed to the user in loan documentation, but may instead be incorporated by reference to the
protocol’s documentation or frequently asked questions.63
Investors in crypto-assets can also earn returns on their holdings through staking,64 which is the
process of “locking up”—or committing—crypto-assets to support the operation of the underlying
blockchain in exchange for rewards. Like crypto-assets generally, staking reward estimates are volatile
and can change unpredictably over time, but as of August 2022, one data aggregator estimated that
the top 206 staked assets generated an average annual return of 8.82%.65
Raising Capital (e.g., ICOs)
Startup companies, developers, and other participants in the crypto-asset ecosystem have raised
funds from investors and other users to create blockchain projects, establish DAOs or DeFi protocols,
or simply to create a new coin or token. Such funds have been raised through so-called “initial coin
oferings,” or ICOs, which have been compared to crowdfunding and initial public oferings (IPOs) in
traditional regulated securities markets.66
A typical ICO starts with the developer or project owner issuing a white paper that provides some
information on the goals of the project and other details.67 Tokens ofered through the project are
ofen labeled as “utility tokens,” which purport to provide investors a means to later obtain access to
certain products or services in exchange for the tokens. Alternatively, tokens may purport to represent
an ownership stake in the project or a proportional right to earn certain rewards. Tokens are ofen
then sold in secondary markets to other investors, either through centralized or decentralized crypto-
asset platforms or other intermediaries.
62 See aaVe, Risk Parameters, https://docs.aave.com/risk/asset-risk/risk-parameters#health-factor.
63 See, e.g., Alexis Goldstein, Director of Financial Policy, Open Markets Institute, Written Testimony before the United States Congress Joint
Economic Committee (Nov. 17, 2021), at 20, https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/aa387917-9456-4b1f-a948-f086594c4d15/
alexis-goldstein-jec-crypto-hearing-testimony.pdf.
64 Staking returns are only applicable in crypto-assets native to blockchains that use the proof-of-stake (PoS) consensus mechanism. In
PoS blockchains, validators are selected to verify new blocks of data to be added to the network based on the quantity of native coins
they have staked. Some investors pool assets to meet staking requirements, which increases the validator’s chances of being selected
to verify blocks and generates rewards—usually in the form of fees paid in new native blockchain coins—that typically are distributed to
pool contributors on a pro-rata basis. “Staking” is also sometimes loosely referred to by certain DeFi protocols as a synonym for simply
locking assets into a smart contract on the protocol.
65 s taKing rewards, Top 10 Crypto Assets by Staking Marketcap, https://www.stakingrewards.com. As with other data sources regarding crypto
assets noted above, such figures may not be entirely reliable, as evidenced by this site’s disclaimer regarding the accuracy of information.
See staKing rewards, Disclaimer, https://www.stakingrewards.com/disclaimer.
66 W hether or not a particular ICO entails an ofering of securities will depend on consideration and evaluation of the facts and
circumstances. See seC, supra note 31, at 10, 17; SEC v. Kik Interactive Inc., 19 Civ. 5244 (S.D.N.Y. 2020); SEC v. Telegram Group Inc., 448 F.
Supp. 3d, 352 (S.D.N.Y. 2020) (granting preliminary injunction under the securities laws).
67 I nitial crypto-asset oferings may bear diferent labels more specific to the type of entity or purpose of the capital raise or may be
structured and executed slightly diferently, but the general concept is the same.
18
Opportunities in Native Crypto-asset Financial Markets, Products, and Services
The capability ofered by blockchain technology to transact in “trustless” environments with reduced
number of intermediaries creates a number of potential opportunities, many of which are yet to be
realized. Proponents have long claimed that new financial products and services could be created
to operate in an automated and distributed environment with potentially lower operating costs and
enabled by faster crypto-asset payment settlement activity. There could also be more widely available
financial products and services with direct-to-consumer and consumer-to-consumer features of
crypto-asset technologies and business models. For example, specialized assets with novel features
appealing to discrete types of purchasers may emerge.68 This may ofer some an alternative to
traditional markets where the creation of financial and non-financial products is subject to diferent
degrees of intermediation that create variations in the benefits that entrepreneurs, businesses,
investors, and consumers realize from capital investments.69
The degree to which consumers, investors, and businesses may or may not benefit from current
practices for the creation and trading of crypto-assets depends upon a range of factors. Many of
these factors are similar to those that are present in traditional financial markets, albeit with unique
applications in the crypto-asset context. For example, search costs in crypto-asset markets are
high because of the increasing variation in and lack of definitive information about crypto-assets,
which may make them more dificult to value, combined with the sheer number of crypto-assets and
markets, which means investors must devote more resources to identify attractive investments and
avoid resource misallocations as well as scams.70 Crypto-asset markets may also lack liquidity and be
prone to bubbles71 as a result of 24/7 trading and faster settlement, similar to the dynamics present
in traditional financial markets.72 Finally, credit risk associated with the underlying leveraged trading
in crypto-asset markets may not be controlled fully by collateralization and automated liquidation
practices used with many crypto-asset loans.73 Further, in order for these markets to reach their full
potential, they must be operated in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Financial Market and Payment System Infrastructures
To date, the primary use cases, and accompanying future opportunities, of crypto-assets for financial
markets and payments depend upon their potential for faster and less expensive payment and
transaction settlement.
68 See JosePh abadi & MarCus brunnerMeier, bloCKChain eConoMiCs (NBER, Working Paper 25407, 2018), https://www.nber.org/system/
files/working_papers/w25407/w25407.pdf; Hugo Benedetti & Ehsan Nikbakht, Returns and Network Growth of Digital Tokens Afer
Cross Listings, Journal of CorPorate finanCe (Vol. 66 Issue 101853, Feb. 2021), https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0929119920302972?via%3Dihub; and Paul P. MoMtaz, is deCentralized finanCe (defi) effiCient? (the anderson sChool at uCla, 2022), https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/360226953_IS_DECENTRALIZED_FINANCE_DEFI_EFFICIENT.
69 See Paul P. MoMtaz, supra note 68.
70 Id., at 8-10.
71 F.A. Enoksen, Ch.J. Landsnes, K. Lučivjanská, and P. Molnár, Understanding Risk of Bubbles in Cryptocurrencies, Journal of eConoMiC behaVior
and organization (Vol. 176, Aug. 2020), at 129-144, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167268120301505?via%3Dihub.
72 W ei Xiong & Jialin Yu, The Chinese Warrants Bubble, aMeriCan eConoMiC reView (Vol. 101 No. 6, Oct. 2011), at 2723–2753, https://www.aeaweb.
org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.101.6.2723; oliVier J. blanChard & MarK w. watson, bubbles, rational exPeCtations and finanCial MarKets (nber,
Working Paper 0945, 1982), https://www.nber.org/papers/w0945; and J. Michael Harrison & David M. Kreps, Speculative Investor Behavior
in a Stock Market with Heterogeneous Expectations, quarterly Journal of eConoMiCs (Vol. 92 No 2, 1978), at 323-336, https://www.jstor.org/
stable/1884166?seq=1.
73 s irio araMonte, sebastian doerr, wenqian huang & andreas sChriMPf, supra note 58, at 2. See also Eli Tan, Many Bored Ape NFTs Are in Danger of
Getting Liquidated as Borrowed Money Comes Back to Bite, CoindesK (Aug. 19, 2022), https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/08/19/
many-bored-ape-nfs-are-in-danger-of-getting-liquidated-as-borrowed-money-comes-back-to-bite.
19
Payments
Increased competition associated with the development and introduction of crypto-asset-based
faster payment systems may prompt the existing fiat-based payment systems to respond with more
competitive, innovative, and inclusive oferings. The degree to which these benefits will be realized
depends on the extent and permanence of the adoption of faster crypto-asset-based payment
systems.74
While crypto-assets have not become widely adopted as a medium of exchange in the real economy,
which limits their viability as a payment mechanism, some versions of peer-to-peer faster payments
functionality exist within the crypto-asset ecosystem, and payment services are available to
businesses and consumers directly through crypto-asset platforms and some payment platforms.75
Though such services are generally not yet significantly scaled or interoperable, they do represent
working examples of practical uses of crypto-asset payment systems for individual businesses,
investors, and consumers. For example:76
• Crypto-asset service providers and blockchain technologies could improve eficiency in
international payments and remittances for businesses and individual customers.77 These
and similar alternatives could help address the lack of interoperability across the payment
infrastructures of diferent countries and the absence of a single global banking network or service
that enables faster international funds settlement. These changes could provide an alternative
to the current system of time consuming and expensive correspondent banking processes to
complete international payments and remittances.78
• Applications of crypto-assets and DLT technologies could improve trade credit provision and
other administrative processes related to trade in physical goods. Common problems in the
sector include the lack of visibility in physical supply chain processes, ineficient manual
paperwork requirements, regulatory and compliance costs, fraud risks, and high transaction
costs. DLT applications in trade finance could create a single source of reference information to
help participants synchronize the movement of physical goods, information, and financing, at
times paired with smart contract and foreign exchange functions that may eliminate the need for
correspondent banks and additional transaction fees.79
74 See the report required by Section 4(b) of the Executive Order for additional discussion of payments.
75 It is important to note that, since sending crypto-assets from one wallet to another typically requires an on-chain transaction, there is a
non-deterministic fee that these platforms will pass on to users, to pay the miner or the validator a gas fee; these fees can be high in times
of peak congestion.
76 Note that these projects are referenced here only as examples, and this report does not endorse or recommend the use of any specific
asset, product, platform, or intermediary. The mention of, or absence of reference to, any particular project or application also does not
reflect a view on viability, operational soundness, or legal status of such project or application.
77 S ee inter-aMeriCan deVeloPMent banK, Cross border PayMents with bloCKChain 38 (2020), https://publications.iadb.org/publications/english/
document/Cross-Border-Payments-with-Blockchain.pdf. See also friederiKe rühMann, sai aashirVad Konda, Paul horroCKs & nina taKa, Can
bloCKChain teChnologies reduCe the Cost of reMittanCes? 4 (organisation for eConoMiC CooPeration and deVeloPMent (oeCd), 2020), https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/docserver/d4d6ac8f-en.pdf?expires=1661626664&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=0B50ED298A2B06C0625EB90BF9EBB569.
78 J ason eKberg, MiChael ho, teK yew Chia, laura liu, naVeen Mallela, harshiKa Patel & suKrit Khatri, unloCKing $120 billion Value in Cross-border
PayMents 5 (oliVer wyMan, 2021), https://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-wyman/v2/publications/2021/nov/unlocking-120-
billion-value-in-cross-border-payments.pdf.
79 Ilias Ioannou & Guven Demirel, Blockchain and supply chain finance: a critical literature review at the intersection of operations, finance
and law, Journal of banKing and finanCial teChnology (Vol. 6, May 9, 2022), at 83–107, https://doi.org/10.1007/s42786-022-00040-1.
20
• Crypto-asset platforms, protocols, and applications have also introduced services that may allow
users to create payment streams for employees, contractors, suppliers, and other beneficiaries.
Such systems may provide faster access to funds and act as a close substitute for cash. These
services could be particularly useful for gig workers, lower income populations, and those who are
unbanked or underbanked.
• Finally, stablecoins purport to provide features that make them both more stable than non-asset-
backed crypto-assets as a means of payment or settlement for crypto-asset-based transactions,
and potentially, more broadly useful.
Clearing and Settlement Uses and Related Opportunities
Crypto-asset technologies aspire to make real-time settlement standard practice, potentially reducing
risks and expenses of trading compared to secondary markets for most traditional non-derivative
financial products.80 Current plans to shorten the settlement cycle for U.S. securities markets do not
set a goal of real-time settlement, so in the absence of broader adoption of real-time settlement,
crypto-asset technologies may present an opportunity.81
Tokenization, the process of digitally representing an existing real asset (e.g., securities, real estate,
commodities, art) on a distributed ledger,82 involves a public or private ledger that links the economic
value and rights derived from these real assets with digital tokens. The act of tokenizing any asset,
including intangible assets (e.g., intellectual property), introduces the technological benefits of DLT
to the related clearing and settlement processes by processing transaction details and automating
all other transaction related events through settlement.83 Such application may create innovative
methods for settling and clearing transactions, an area of finance with potential for growth—with
several financial institutions exploring methods to improve the clearing or settlement of traditional
securities transactions using blockchain technology.84 These applications generally are using a
private permissioned blockchain environment rather than a public, permissionless environment that
helps improve the integrity of the system.85 The scope of future tokenized crypto-asset activities on
permissioned blockchains is potentially very large, with proxies for the estimated market capitalization
of financial products in this segment including the value of securities held in custody by the Depository
80 bis, strengthening rePo Clearing and settleMent arrangeMents 19 (2010), https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d91.pdf. See also George Jia,
Implications of Diverging Settlement Standards, DTCC (Aug. 6, 2020), https://www.dtcc.com/dtcc-connection/articles/2020/august/06/
implications-of-diverging-settlement-standards.
81 Shortening the Securities Transaction Settlement Cycle, 87 Fed. Reg. 10436 (Feb. 24, 2022).
82 The Financial Stability Board (FSB) defines tokenization as “the representation of traditional assets – e.g., financial instruments, a basket
of collateral or real assets – on DLT.” See fsb, deCentralised finanCial teChnologies: rePort on finanCial stability, regulatory and goVernanCe iMPliCations
13 (2019), https://www.fsb.org/2019/06/decentralised-financial-technologies-report-on-financial-stability-regulatory-and-governance-
implications.
83 B en St. Clair, Repo by the minute’ could reshape lending – but not quite yet, risK.net (Aug. 4, 2022), https://www.risk.net/
derivatives/7952356/repo-by-the-minute-could-reshape-lending-but-not-quite-yet.
84 See, e.g., Matthew Leising, Goldman Begins Trading on JPMorgan’s Repo Blockchain Network, blooMberg (Jun. 22, 2021), https://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-06-22/goldman-sachs-begins-trading-on-jpmorgan-repo-blockchain-network#xj4y7vzkg. The article
reports on new technology related activities of JP Morgan, Bank of New York Mellon Corp., Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Paxos Trust Co.,
and Arca.
85 i ota Kaousar nassr, the toKenisation of assets and Potential iMPliCations for finanCial MarKets (oeCd, 2020), https://www.oecd.org/finance/The-
Tokenisation-of-Assets-and-Potential-Implications-for-Financial-Markets.htm.
21
Trust and Clearing Corporation (over $70 trillion),86 and assets under management across asset classes
in private markets ($9.8 trillion).87
The integration of blockchain technologies and crypto-assets into clearing and settlement of
traditional securities processes may allow for faster and cheaper transactions, increased transparency
of asset positions, and increased liquidity through fractionalization.88 Technology investments made
by many incumbent firms in banking, insurance, asset management, and other sectors may also
help to enable a transition towards increasing digitization of assets. Examples of pilot projects using
blockchain technology and crypto-assets in financial market infrastructure services include:89
• A platform for clearing members that digitalizes pre-IPO equity securities, throughout issuance,
distribution, and secondary transfer, and is designed to expand into other markets such as funds,
debt, real estate, and loans. The platform is designed to be blockchain agnostic but will initially
support issuance of securities on the public Ethereum network.
• A private permissioned distributed ledger system that records changes in ownership of securities
and cash resulting from the settlement of securities transactions between participants using a
digitized security entitlement—a digital representation of the security. The system is designed to
conduct real-time delivery-versus-payment settlement of securities and cash for trades.
• A blockchain-based commodities settlement platform that settles transactions across gold, silver,
platinum, and palladium that allows customers to pre-fund settlements and net multilaterally,
creating a single platform where settlement occurs for both metals and cash positions.
Other Commercial Activities
The activities, predominantly trading and other forms of speculation, discussed above currently
comprise most of the transactions involving crypto-assets or occurring in the crypto-asset ecosystem.
Nevertheless, consumers and other users of crypto-assets are engaging in a few diferent types of
activities that have ostensibly non-financial aims, including social clubs and data storage built around
crypto-assets and decentralized protocols. A recent report by the U.S. Government Accountability
Ofice (GAO) found that blockchain has a wide range of potential non-financial uses, including
applications to organize supply chains, create less hierarchical organizations, and document title
registries for real estate.90
86 dtCC, DTCC to Launch Platform to Digitalize and Modernize Private Markets, (Nov. 9, 2021), https://www.dtcc.com/news/2021/
november/09/dtcc-to-launch-platform-to-digitalize-and-modernize-private-markets.
87 M CKinsey & CoMPany, PriVate MarKets rally to new heights: MCKinsey global PriVate MarKets reView 2022 2 (2022), https://www.mckinsey.com/
industries/private-equity-and-principal-investors/our-insights/mckinseys-private-markets-annual-review.
88 iota Kaousar nassr, supra note 85, at 7.
89 N ote that these projects are referenced here only as examples, and this report does not endorse or recommend the use of any specific
asset, product, platform, or intermediary. The mention of, or absence of reference to, any particular project or application also does not
reflect a view on viability, operational soundness, or legal status of such project or application.
90 u.s. goVernMent aCCountability offiCe, bloCKChain: eMerging teChnology offers benefits for soMe aPPliCations but faCes Challenges 1 (2022), https://
www.gao.gov/assets/gao-22-104625.pdf.
22
Most such eforts are still in the pilot stage, and some prominent non-financial use cases have
encountered challenges or made significant misrepresentations.91 For example, the GAO found that
most blockchain networks are not designed to be interoperable and cannot communicate with other
blockchains.92 Organizations that want to use blockchain also face legal and regulatory uncertainties
and have found it dificult to find skilled workers to implement their blockchain projects.
Non-Fungible Tokens
Whereas some activities involving crypto-assets rely on fungible coins and tokens that are
interchangeable with one another, a class of crypto-assets (NFTs) has developed that allows the
tokenization of distinct characteristics such that each token is unique and distinguishable from any
other. NFTs have a range of potential uses, including establishing a record of purchase and potentially
ownership and authenticity of a digital work or asset through a unique cryptographic code that cannot
be replicated. The primary uses of NFTs currently may be non-financial in nature, such as digital art
and other digital collectibles, akin to collecting trading cards or other collections, including “virtual
real estate.”93 In practice, however, they can be highly speculative investments—many of which have
been marketed as such by the issuers of NFTs and their agents. Among consumers and investors, NFTs
have become one of the most used segments of the crypto-asset ecosystem. However, the legal rights
conveyed by NFTs are ofen unclear, raising issues that courts may have to resolve.94
NFTs may enable new methods for artists or others to sell their works in digital form, but may also
introduce new risks for artists.95 An NFT can be designed to include an in-built royalty system such
that the content creator (or others) can earn a profit each time the NFT is resold.96 Participants in the
NFT space include content creators,97 consumers, investors or users, and miners/validators. They also
include platforms that facilitate the creation, distribution, ofer and sale of NFTs.
NFT projects ofen center around “collections,” which consist of multiple digital works—e.g., up to
10,000 NFTs in so-called “10K projects”—created around a single theme but each with slight variation,
ofen created algorithmically. Consumers, investors, or other users seek to own NFTs and engage in
primary and secondary transactions. They include collectors and fans, who may be buying for reasons
other than material value or an expected return, but also include speculators and so-called flippers
hoping to make quick gains. The vast majority of NFT transactions are at the retail level, defined as
91 See, e.g., Matt Binder, Web3 darling Helium has bragged about Lime being a client for years. Lime says it isn't true., Mashable (Jul. 29, 2022),
https://mashable.com/article/helium-lime-web3-crypto.
92 For more background on blockchain interoperability, see rafael belChior, andre VasConCelos, sergio guerrero & Miguel Correia, a surVey on
bloCKChain interoPerability: Past, Present, and future trends (arxiV, 2021), https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14282.
93 In a famous example, in March 2021, an NFT representing a digital work by an artist sold through an auction for over $69 million.
See Scott Reyburn, JPG File Sells for $69 Million, as ‘NFT Mania’ Gathers Pace, the new yorK tiMes (Mar. 25, 2021), https://www.nytimes.
com/2021/03/11/arts/design/nf-auction-christies-beeple.html.
94 See Julie M. Moringiello & Christopher K. Odinet, supra note 9, at 7.
95 See, e.g., Kevin Collier, NFT art sales are booming. Just without some artists' permission., nbC news (Jan. 10, 2022), https://www.nbcnews.
com/tech/security/nf-art-sales-are-booming-just-artists-permission-rcna10798.
96 Rosanna McLaughlin, ‘I went from having to borrow money to making $4m in a day’: how NFTs are shaking up the art world, the guardian
(Nov. 6, 2021), www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2021/nov/06/how-nfs-non-fungible-tokens-are-shaking-up-the-art-world.
97 C ontent creators include individual artists, celebrities, NFT project teams (groups that plan and initiate NFT projects), and others.
23
trades worth less than $10,000, making the NFT space more retail-driven than overall crypto-asset
markets.98
NFTs are commonly transacted on centralized marketplaces, specialized websites where users can buy,
sell, and trade NFTs similar to how users might trade other coins and tokens. Approximately $40 billion
worth of crypto-assets are estimated to have been sent to major NFT marketplaces in 2021, and more
than $37 billion as of May 1, 2022;99 however, more recent industry figures suggest that NFT transaction
volumes are declining.100 While some NFT marketplaces may provide custody services for users’ NFTs,
many marketplaces do not and—as with other crypto-assets—users may need their own blockchain-
secured wallets to store and access their NFTs.
NFTs are created, or minted, according to “non-fungible” token standards such that ownership can
be demonstrated and verified through entries in a blockchain ledger.101 Minting refers to the process
whereby an NFT is created and transferred to its initial owner and requires a transaction with the
smart contract of the NFT project or marketplace hosted on the blockchain. Minting NFTs can be a
competitive process, with buyers frequently competing on the basis of the gas fees they are willing
to pay to record a transaction on a blockchain. As with other crypto-assets, miners or validators are
needed to execute the computational and validation work necessary to record NFTs to the blockchain.
Because miners and validators determine the order in which they will validate pending transactions
and are incentivized to prioritize transactions based on the fees they can earn, they can benefit from
“gas wars” between buyers in fast-moving markets.102
Gaming and Entertainment
The growing role of NFTs in video games and other online entertainment systems is another use case.
While traditional video games have long enabled users to make in-game purchases of content and
premium features, for example, to enhance their game playing experience, such transactions have
generally been one-way flows of payments from players to game developers. But the integration of NFTs
98 Chainalysis groups NFT transaction into three categories: (i) Retail—transactions for less than $10,000 in cryptocurrency; (ii) NFT
Collectors—transactions between $10,000 and $100,000; and (iii) Institutional—transactions for more than $100,000. By this
classification, as of October 31, 2021, about 80% of NFT transactions—by transaction count—were at the retail level, 19% were at the
NFT collector level, and less than 1% were institutional. However, in terms of transaction volume, retail NFT transactions are quite small,
accounting for just 11% of trading volume during the period studied, while NFT collector-sized and institutional-sized transactions
accounted for 63% and 26%, respectively, of NFT transaction volume. See Chainalysis, the 2021 nft MarKet rePort 5-6 (2021),
https://go.chainalysis.com/nf-market-report.html.
99 Chainalysis, NFT Transaction Activity Stabilizing in 2022 Afer Explosive Growth in 2021, (May 5, 2022), https://blog.chainalysis.com/reports/
chainalysis-web3-report-preview-nfs.
100 See Raphael Minter, NFT Global Sales Hit 2022 Low, Sinking More Than $4 Billion, be[in]CryPto (Aug. 4, 2022), https://beincrypto.com/nf-
global-sales-hit-2022-low-sinking-more-than-4-billion.
101 On the Ethereum blockchain, for example, whereas most “fungible” tokens are created according to the ERC-20 token standard, NFTs are
created according to the “non-fungible” ERC-721 token standard.
102 In periods of volatility, a buyer may not only lose the opportunity to mint the NFT at the ofered price altogether, but they may also incur
losses in spent fees attempting to do so. That is, miners still collect transaction fees for failed mints, and these amounts can be quite
substantial, and in some cases may exceed what goes to the content creators. Many blockchain transactions, including the minting of
NFTs, involve multiple execution steps, and the gas price is applied to each separate step. Buyers attempting to mint NFTs will indicate
what they are willing to pay per execution step, as well as set a capped aggregate amount. Miners will choose transactions with higher gas
prices, but if the number of execution steps—which is ofen not known before initiating the transaction—is suficient to exhaust the user’s
fee-spending cap, the user will “run out of gas,” resulting in a failed mint. The miner, however, retains the gas collected for execution steps
performed up to that point. These costs may not always be transparent to those attempting to mint an NFT, especially new users.
24
into popular games, as well as the development of blockchain-native games, means that players can
purchase tokenized game features and attributes which they own and are able to transfer.103 In addition,
online or blockchain-enabled “metaverses”—digital worlds where participants can interact virtually with
other users and purchase tokenized digital real estate and other “merchandise”—have grown in popularity
as form of entertainment. With an estimated 215 million, or 66% of, Americans playing video games at
least once per week, the potential market for such so-called “play-to-earn” games is substantial.104
Potential Opportunities in NFTs
NFTs have a number of potential future applications, including: (i) enabling the recording and
verification of transfers of real estate ownership; (ii) facilitating automatic royalty payments for music
and film; (iii) preventing duplication and counterfeits in the titling of other property and consumer
goods; (iv) enabling more digital credentials, including identification, licensing, certification; and (v)
facilitating financial industry legal compliance.
NFTs have the potential to function across both digital spaces and the physical world. As a result,
NFTs can include features that serve as membership cards or tickets, providing access to events,
exclusive merchandise, and special discounts.105 However, many of the potential NFT use cases are
still materializing, in part due to evolving technological and legal landscape, including with respect to
licensing, contracts, copyright and intellectual property, anti-money laundering, and data protection.106
IV. RISKS AND EXPOSURES FOR CONSUMERS, INVESTORS, AND BUSINESSES
Having considered the potential opportunities presented by crypto-asset products and services,
this part of the report reviews the risks posed by crypto-assets. These risks are divided into three
categories: (i) conduct risks, including product, and investor, consumer, and business protection (e.g.,
thef, fraud) risks; (ii) operational risks, including the technology-specific risks of crypto-assets and
systems; and (iii) risks arising from crypto-asset intermediation. Some of the risks discussed in this
part are unique to the crypto-asset ecosystem, as a result of the features of crypto-assets. Others are
simply a form of risk already present in traditional finance markets, but which is heightened due to the
specific attributes of the crypto-asset ecosystem.
103 Though tokenized game features and attributes are, on the surface, intended to enhance players’ experiences within the gaming
environment, to the extent these NFTs have tradable value there is a possibility that some players will become incentivized to use
them predominantly as speculative assets, purchasing in-game NFTs primarily with the aim of selling them for a future profit. Indeed,
players both in the U.S. and abroad have taken to playing certain games as a way to earn a living, and some games have deployed
design features and incentives in order to create an “investor mindset” among new players. In addition, the increased prevalence of
“gamification” of investment activities more generally has come under greater scrutiny in recent years. See James Fallows Tierney,
Investment Games, duKe law Journal (Vol. 72, Forthcoming 2022-23), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3916407.
104 EntertainMent software assoCiation, essential faCts about the Video gaMe industry (2022), https://www.theesa.com/resource/2022-essential-
facts-about-the-video-game-industry.
105 S teve Kaczynski & Scott Duke Kominers, How NFTs Create Value, Harvard Business Review (Nov. 10, 2021), https://hbr.org/2021/11/how-
nfs-create-value.
106 For example, since NFTs essentially represent the original and unique cryptographic code or on-chain token linked to the of-chain
digital work or real-world asset, ownership of an NFT may not translate to ownership of an underlying asset or the associated rights
(such as copyright and licensing rights). See, e.g., Stuart Levi, Mana Ghaemmaghami & Gabriel Mohr, Skadden Discusses the Growing
Complexity of Commercial Rights Issues In NFTs, the Cls blue sKy blog (Jun. 1, 2022), https://clsbluesky.law.columbia.edu/2022/06/01/
skadden-discusses-the-growing-complexity-of-commercial-rights-issues-in-nfs. NFTs can also be used to facilitate money laundering
and terror financing; digital art assets are inherently easier than traditional art for such purposes. See u.s. dePartMent of the treasury,
study of the faCilitation of Money laundering and terror finanCe through the trade in the worKs of art (2022), https://home.treasury.gov/system/
files/136/Treasury_Study_WoA.pdf.
25
This part then considers factors afecting the relative exposure of consumers, investors, and
businesses to these risks, including due to market participants’ non-compliance with current laws and
regulations, and ongoing changes related to the scope and application of those legal requirements.
Conduct Risks
Consumers, investors, and businesses using or investing in crypto-assets are exposed to a variety of
conduct risks in the crypto-asset ecosystem. Investing is ofen at the core of crypto-asset activity;
accordingly, the conduct risks below largely focus on risks associated with investing activities.
Crypto-assets and markets that operate out of compliance with applicable laws and regulations, or are
unregulated, can breed fraud, abusive market practices, and disclosure gaps.107 Certain practices in
the crypto-asset ecosystem have resulted in financial harm to consumers, investors, and businesses;
unfair and inequitable outcomes; and damage to the integrity of the market. Some notable conduct
risks are described below, but risks are likely to continue to evolve as crypto-asset markets change and
therefore require vigilant and robust regulatory supervision and oversight.108
Fraud, Thef, and Mismanagement
As the crypto-asset market has grown, so has the volume of fraud, scams, and thef in the ecosystem;
indeed, unlawful transaction activity globally reached an all-time high in value in 2021.109
Criminals ofen take advantage of innovations and new technologies to perpetrate fraudulent
activities, including promises or guarantees of high returns. Moreover, the crypto-asset ecosystem
has unique features that make it an increasingly attractive target for unlawful activity, including the
ongoing evolution of the underlying technology, pseudonymity, irreversibility of transactions, and the
current asymmetry of information between issuers of crypto-assets and consumers and investors.
Multiple U.S. government agencies track and publish crypto-asset related complaints reported by
the public, which have indicated a sharp increase in losses related to crypto-assets. They have also
issued warnings related to their findings, including noting a material increase in crypto-assets as a
payment method for all types of scams, including investment scams, romance scams, and business and
government impersonation scams.110
• The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) has warned against
the scams leveraging cryptocurrency ATMs,111 cryptocurrency customer support impersonators,
as well as romance scams that involve investment opportunities. In 2021, the IC3 received 34,202
107 iosCo, supra note 21, at 36.
108 Id., at 5.
109 At the same time, transaction activity associated with unlawful applications reached an all-time low as a share of all crypto-asset
activity, reflecting the growth in overall transaction volume. See Chainalysis, the 2022 CryPto CriMe rePort 3-4 (2022), https://go.chainalysis.
com/2022-Crypto-Crime-Report.html.
110 For more information on crypto-asset scams, see ftC, Reports show scammers cashing in on crypto craze, (Jun. 2022), www.fc.gov/
system/files/fc_gov/pdf/Crypto%20Spotlight%20FINAL%20June%202022.pdf.
111 Criminal actors, in various fraudulent schemes, maliciously leverage physical cryptocurrency ATMs to receive payments from victims.
See, e.g., fbi, The FBI Warns of Fraudulent Schemes Leveraging Cryptocurrency ATMs and QR Codes to Facilitate Payment, (Nov. 4, 2021),
https://www.ic3.gov/Media/Y2021/PSA211104.
26
complaints involving the use of some type of crypto-asset. While the number of complaints
decreased by approximately 3% in 2021 year-over-year, the loss amount reported in IC3 complaints
increased by nearly 600%, from $246 million in 2020 to more than $1.6 billion in 2021.112
• The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) had 2,404 published crypto-asset consumer
complaints in 2021 compared to 983 in 2020, amounting an increase of over 140%. As of July 15,
2022, the CFPB had 906 complaints year-to-date and 1,870 published complaints in the prior 12
months.113
• The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) had more than 46,000 reported incidents of fraud between
January 1, 2021, and March 31, 2022, with people claiming losses that exceeded $1 billion worth of
cryptocurrencies. Cryptocurrencies represented 24% of all fraud-related losses reported to the FTC
during that period—more than any other payment method.114 The median individual reported loss
was $2,600.115
Measuring or estimating the volume of crime involving crypto-assets, or any criminal activity, can be
challenging as it relies on self-reporting by victims and thus is likely to be underreported. However,
given the public nature of blockchains, several private firms have been able to use proprietary
methodologies to track losses from known thefs, scams, and frauds. According to one private sector
estimate, there was $14 billion worth of crypto-asset-based crime, globally, in 2021, up from $7.8
billion in 2020; the breakdown is as follows:
• Scams: Scams were the largest form of crypto-asset-based crime by transaction volume in 2021.
The number of scams in 2021 rose by over 60% year-over-year, while the value of stolen crypto-
112 Fbi, 2021 internet CriMe rePort 13 (2021), https://www.ic3.gov/Media/PDF/AnnualReport/2021_IC3Report.pdf.
113 CFPB, CFPB Complaint Database, https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/consumer-complaints/search.
114 FTC, supra note 110.
115 Id.
27
assets rose by over 80% in 2021 to $7.8 billion. $2.8 billion of this total came from a relatively
new but increasingly common scheme known as a “rug pull,” in which developers build out what
appears to be legitimate crypto-asset projects, misleading investors into purchasing tokens
associated with a project, before ultimately draining the funds provided by those investors and
disappearing, typically driving the token’s value to zero.116
• Thefs: Of the $14 billion in crypto-asset-based crime in 2021, thef rose by over 500% year-over-
year to $3.2 billion in total.117 Thefs include security breaches that target individuals’ private keys,
which can be obtained through phishing, key logging, or social engineering, code exploits, and
flash loan attacks.118 2021 also marked the first year when the level of thef in DeFi surpassed thef
on centralized exchanges; out of $3.2 billion of total stolen funds, $2.3 billion was stolen from DeFi
protocols, as opposed to centralized platforms, which represented a year-over-year increase of
over 1,300%.119
Analysts believe that most instances of thef from DeFi protocols can be traced back to errors in the
smart contract code governing those protocols, which hackers exploit to steal funds, or promoters
exploit flaws in their operating code that can lead to erroneous transactions, similar to the errors
that allow rug pulls to occur. Users, who ofen lack the ability to read the code, must rely on a
developer’s word—ofered, for example, through a protocol’s white paper—that a smart contract
will perform as described. Still, even auditing of the code may be insuficient to prevent thef as
nearly 30% of code exploits and over 70% of flash loan attacks occurred on platforms audited
within the prior year.120 Sophisticated hacks, especially hacks perpetrated by nation state actors,
have also emerged as an area of concern.121
• Other: Of the remaining $3 billion of crypto-asset-based crime in 2021, nearly $2 billion was
associated with drug traficking. Other activity can be traced to sales of stolen logins or credit
cards, ransomware, malware, terrorism financing, and child abuse material.
116 Chainalysis, supra note 109, at 3, 5, 24, and 81-84. Note that the definition of rug pulls is evolving, particularly as an innovation in
scamming. Another form of a rug pull would include limiting sell orders, where tokens are coded only to be bought but unable to
be sold. See Valerio Puggioni, Crypto rug pulls: What is a rug pull in crypto and 6 ways to spot it, CointelegraPh (Feb. 6, 2022), https://
cointelegraph.com/explained/crypto-rug-pulls-what-is-a-rug-pull-in-crypto-and-6-ways-to-spot-it. See also Koinly, Rug Pulls: Your
Complete Guide, (Mar. 31, 2022), https://koinly.io/blog/crypto-rug-pulls-guide.
117 I d., at 6.
118 I n an innovation unique to DeFi lending, some protocols may support “flash loans,” which enable users to borrow, use, and repay crypto-
assets in a single transaction that is recorded on the blockchain in the same data block. Because there is no default risk associated
with flash loans, users can borrow without posting collateral and without risk of being liquidated. A “flash loan attack” can occur when
the temporary surge of funds obtained in a flash loan is used to manipulate prices of crypto-assets, ofen through the interaction of
multiple DeFi services, enabling attackers to take over the governance of a protocol, change the code, and drain the treasury. See, e.g.,
world eConoMiC foruM, deCentralized finanCe (defi) PoliCy-MaKer toolKit 18 (2021), https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_DeFi_Policy_Maker_
Toolkit_2021.pdf. See also Shaurya Malwa, Solana DeFi Protocol Nirvana Drained of Liquidity Afer Flash Loan Exploit, CoindesK (Jul. 28,
2022), https://www.coindesk.com/tech/2022/07/28/solana-defi-protocol-nirvana-drained-of-liquidity-afer-flash-loan-exploit.
119 Chainalysis, supra note 109, at 70.
120 I d., at 73.
121 H acks linked to nation state actors, responsible for some of the unlawful activity discussed in this section, have advanced to become
persistent threats in the crypto-asset industry. One example was in the play-to-earn crypto-asset segment of the ecosystem, where
the game Axie Infinity collapsed following a $620 million hack of its Ronin Network side-chain, which was attributed to hackers
afiliated with Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. See Chainalysis, supra note 109, at 120. See also Aaron Schafer, North Korean
hackers linked to $260 million Axie Infinity crypto heist, the washington Post (Apr. 14, 2022), https://www.washingtonpost.com/
technology/2022/04/14/us-links-axie-crypto-heist-north-korea.
28
As discussed in more detail in Part VI, Recommendations, U.S. regulatory and law enforcement
authorities should aggressively pursue investigations and enforcement actions, and pursue vigilant
monitoring of the crypto-asset sector for unlawful activity.
Information Asymmetry: Lack of Transparency
The traditional capital markets have statutes and regulations that create a robust disclosure regime,
providing consumers and investors with material information, including with respect to conflicts
of interest, so that users can better understand the risks of participation and make more informed
decisions regarding their investment risks.122 In the crypto-asset ecosystem, issuers and platforms may
be acting in non-compliance with these statutes and regulations and, thus, do not maintain the same
protocols to protect investors. Further, disclosures in the crypto-asset ecosystem that are provided
may lack standardization and may not disclose material information integral to assessing risk.
Crypto-asset Investments and Governance
Absent compliance with comprehensive, mandatory disclosure requirements, including with respect
to conflicts of interest, information asymmetries will likely advantage insiders at the expense of the
smallest investors and those with the least access to information. Currently, investors may lack
material information necessary to assess the risk of crypto-asset investments, including with respect
to the probability and severity of the loss on the investment; instead, promoters of crypto-asset
investments may at best be providing investors with only broad details or superficial disclosures.123
This lack of disclosure and transparency has been prevalent in the ICO market, and instances of
outright deception are not uncommon. One review of documents produced for 1,450 digital coin
oferings found 271 with red flags that include plagiarized investor documents, promises of guaranteed
returns, and missing or fake executive teams.124 ICOs were growing in popularity when, in 2017, the
SEC issued an investigative report concluding that a token issued through such an ofering in 2016 was
a securities ofering requiring either registration or an exemption under federal securities laws.125 Even
before that report, the SEC was cautioning investors—many of whom are retail investors—and market
professionals about investing in crypto-assets, including ICOs, warning that such investments may
be securities, may be required to be registered with the SEC, and pose substantial risks. Risks in ICOs
include not only their high susceptibility to volatility, information asymmetry, and price depreciation,
but also a substantial risk of loss through fraud and market manipulation. The SEC has brought a
number of civil actions to enforce the federal securities registration requirements and other applicable
laws and regulations.126 More resources may be necessary, however, to address the evolving and
growing rate of frauds, manipulations, and other misconduct.
122 R ostin Behnam, Chair, CFTC, Keynote Address of Chairman Rostin Behnam at the Brookings Institution Webcast of The Future of Crypto
Regulation (Jul. 25, 2022), https://www.cfc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opabehnam24. See also Gary Gensler, Chair, SEC,
Testimony Before the United States House of Representatives Committee on Financial Services (Oct. 5, 2021), https://www.sec.gov/
news/testimony/gensler-2021-10-05.
123 Caroline Crenshaw, supra note 30, at 5-6.
124 S hane Shiflett & Coulter Jones, Buyer Beware: Hundreds of Bitcoin Wannabes Show Hallmarks of Fraud, the wall street Journal (May 17,
2018), www.wsj.com/articles/buyer-beware-hundreds-of-bitcoin-wannabes-show-hallmarks-of-fraud-1526573115.
125 See SEC, supra note 31.
126 See SEC, Crypto Assets and Cyber Enforcement Actions, https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/cybersecurity-enforcement-actions.
29
The NFT market has similar disclosure and integrity gaps, where, for example, consumers can
unknowingly buy NFTs that may contain copyright infringements.127 The industry has seen a
significant increase in the number of lawsuits filed, with claims related to deceitful marketing tactics
or for sales made under false pretenses.128 However, investors ofen sufer from a lack of recourse
because there is insuficient information on whom to hold accountable or because accountable parties
may be outside the jurisdiction of the U.S. courts.129
Crypto-asset investment arrangements also ofen fail to provide disclosures with respect to conflicts
of interest, which is a cornerstone of investor protection in traditional financial markets. Much of DeFi
is funded by venture capital and other professional investors. The underlying funding deals ofen
grant professional investors equity, options, advisory roles, access to project team management,
formal or informal say on governance and operations, anti-dilution rights, and the ability to distribute
controlling interests to allies, among other benefits, which present opportunities for conflicts of
interest. These arrangements are rarely disclosed to retail investors, but they can have a significant
impact on investment values and outcomes.130
For example, one common form of governance, used broadly in DeFi applications, is the issuance of
“governance tokens,” which purport to allow disparate participants to introduce and vote on proposals
determining the function of a blockchain or overlying protocols. One key risk that, due to inadequate
disclosure, may not be apparent to consumers and investors is the concentration of governance tokens
or voting rights among a limited number of actors. Developers and early investors in a crypto-asset
project may keep control of the platform by allocating significant shares of governance tokens to
themselves or otherwise maintaining de facto control.131 Consumers and investors should understand
that the extent to which true decentralization exists in crypto-asset markets is questionable, and
claims of decentralization may be exaggerated.132
Crypto-asset Platforms
Compared to registered financial market intermediaries—which are subject to rules and laws that
promote market integrity and govern risks and business conduct, including identifying, disclosing,
and mitigating conflicts of interest133 and adhering to AML/CFT requirements—many crypto-asset
platforms may either not yet be in compliance with, or may actively claim not to be subject to, existing
applicable U.S. laws and regulations, including registration requirements.134 Consumers, investors,
127 Cristina Criddle, Hermes Clashes with Artist Who Created MetaBirkins NFT, finanCial tiMes (Dec. 10, 2021), https://www.f.com/
content/7953d195-53f6-48d2-8514-460a0ebd9aee.
128 J ames Fanelli, Crypto Industry Sees Surge in Lawsuits as Investor Losses Pile Up, The wall street Journal (Jun. 1, 2022), www.wsj.com/
articles/as-crypto-losses-hit-investors-litigation-picks-up-11654084801.
129 Samantha Hissong, NFT Scams Are Everywhere. Here’s How to Avoid Them, rolling stone (Jan. 24, 2022), https://www.rollingstone.com/
culture/culture-features/nf-crypto-scams-how-to-not-get-scammed-1286614.
130 C aroline Crenshaw, supra note 30, at 9.
131 S ee, e.g., Danny Nelson & Tracy Wang, Master of Anons: How a Crypto Developer Faked a DeFi Ecosystem, CoindesK (Aug. 4, 2022), https://
www.coindesk.com/layer2/2022/08/04/master-of-anons-how-a-crypto-developer-faked-a-defi-ecosystem. For further discussion of
governance in decentralized finance, see Sirio Aramonte, Wenqian Huang & Andreas Schrimpf, supra note 29, at 27-29. See also igor
MaKaroV & antoinette sChoar, CryPtoCurrenCies and deCentralized finanCe (defi) (the brooKings institution, 2022), https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2022/03/SP22_BPEA_MakarovSchoar_conf-draf.pdf.
132 See, e.g., Sirio Aramonte, Wenqian Huang & Andreas Schrimpf, supra note 29.
133 finra, Conflicts of Interest, https://www.finra.org/rules-guidance/key-topics/conflicts-of-interest.
134 See the report required by Section 7(b) of the Executive Order for additional information on illicit finance risks.
30
and businesses using centralized and decentralized crypto-asset platforms are subject to a variety of
risks and inconsistent practices, including the fact that crypto-assets and crypto-asset intermediaries
may be unregistered or otherwise not in compliance with applicable law and that guidance and
supervision of crypto-assets is still developing.
Access to Platforms and Illegal Activity
Access criteria for registered financial markets helps ensure that access to the systems or exchanges
and to associated products is transparent and objective and may support a “gatekeeping” role that
assists in preventing criminal or illegal activity. But access criteria can be varied and inconsistent
among crypto-asset platforms. When the onboarding process used by platforms is limited or opaque,
the risks that the platform may be used for illegal activities increases. Indeed, certain digital platforms
have been charged with violating anti-money laundering laws and failing to implement adequate
required anti-money laundering programs.135
Suitability
Registered financial market intermediaries also seek to protect consumers and investors on platforms
by limiting participation on the platform to investors that are transacting in assets that match their
individual financial situations or risk tolerance levels. Crypto-asset platforms that displace registered
intermediaries can also leave retail investors without access to professional financial advisors or other
intermediaries who help screen potential investments for quality and legitimacy or who are required
by fiduciary standards to act in the best financial interest of their clients.136 Further, crypto-asset
platforms may not be conducting suitability assessments or providing adequate risk disclosures to
investors, increasing the likelihood of investor harm.137
Conflicts of Interest
Crypto-asset platforms ofen do not disclose activities or aspects of their structure (e.g., common
ownership; market making; proprietary trading; and settlement, custody, and advisory services) that
may lead to conflicts of interest or that, if the platforms were registered, would be prohibited by statute
or regulation. Many trading platforms are themselves heavily invested in crypto-assets and conduct
proprietary trading out of compliance with laws to which they are subject or without oversight.
The conflicts of interests in crypto-asset platforms are many and varied. Platforms may be able to
hide conflicted relationships through afiliates in other jurisdictions.138 Some platforms have multiple
afiliates, including proprietary trading funds, that are wholly owned or controlled by the platform
or its related parties. Some platforms provide large investors with favorable treatment, such as free
distributions of coins or tokens, known as “airdrops,” or private cash-outs away from the market.139
135 See, e.g., CFTC, Federal Court Orders BitMEX to Pay $100 Million for Illegally Operating a Cryptocurrency Trading Platform and Anti-Money
Laundering Violations, (Aug. 10, 2021), https://www.cfc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8412-21.
136 Caroline Crenshaw, supra note 30, at 9. See also Kat Tretina, How Fiduciary Duty Impacts Financial Advisors, forbes (Jul. 15, 2022), https://
www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/financial-advisor/what-is-fiduciary-duty.
137 IOSCO, supra note 15, at 10.
138 Sam Reynolds, Crypto Trading Firm TPS Capital Denied Ties to Insolvent Three Arrows. Court Documents Indicate a Connection, CoindesK
(Jul. 19, 2022), https://www.coindesk.com/business/2022/07/19/crypto-trading-firm-tps-capital-denied-ties-to-insolvent-three-arrows-
court-documents-indicate-a-connection.
139 n ew yorK state offiCe of the attorney general, INVESTOR ALERT: Attorney General James Warns New Yorkers About Cryptocurrency Investment
Risks, (Jun. 2, 2022), https://ag.ny.gov/press-release/2022/investor-alert-attorney-general-james-warns-new-yorkers-about-cryptocurrency.
31
Platforms may also engage in steering, with preferential fees for using the specific stablecoins
associated with their platforms. Insider trading can also occur in crypto-asset markets, including on
some of the largest crypto-asset platforms.140
Price Discovery and Market Manipulation
U.S. laws and regulations are designed to safeguard market integrity and protect against price
manipulation and other abusive trading practices. Market manipulation and misleading or
fraudulent and deceptive market conduct is prohibited and distorts the price discovery process,
or prices themselves, and unfairly disadvantages investors. Currently, crypto-asset platforms may
be out of compliance with applicable laws and regulations designed to protect investors and may
maintain varied and inconsistent practices around trade settlement, data reporting, surveillance, and
enforcement of price manipulation, creating serious risk for investors.141
In the crypto-asset ecosystem, the visibility of transactions on a blockchain is also limited by
pseudonymity; without an eficient method for determining the identity of market participants, it is
dificult to ascertain if asset prices and trading volumes reflect organic interest or are the product of
manipulative trading, including by using bots to operate multiple wallets or a group of people trading
collusively.142 As a result, the values of coins and tokens may be propped up by automated trading
or bots that are engaged in wash trading, or platforms may report misleading or inaccurate price
information, including transactions based on self-trading.143
Bots also may be programmed to spot when another investor is trying to make a purchase and then
buy ahead of the trade. Such front-running is a form of value extraction from natural traders and
hinders the ability of investors to obtain reliable information before making an investment decision.
As detailed in Part VI, this report recommends a variety of actions to combat market manipulation and
information asymmetry and their related risks, including increased investigation and enforcement to
bring more crypto-assets and intermediaries into compliance with applicable laws and regulations
and their associated disclosure requirements.
Problematic Terms of Service
Some users of crypto-assets are subject to problematic terms of service. For example, users staking
their crypto-assets face a number of other potential risks, including insuficiently disclosed lock-up
periods during which staked assets cannot be withdrawn, waiting periods for honoring withdrawal
requests, exposure to the performance and integrity of a staking pool operator, and the risk of the pool
140 See SEC, SEC Charges Former Coinbase Manager, Two Others in Crypto Asset Insider Trading Action, (Jul. 21, 2022), https://www.sec.gov/
news/press-release/2022-127. See also ester félez-Viñas, luKe Johnson & talis J. Putnins, insider trading in CryPtoCurrenCy MarKets (2022),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4184367. See also Alexis Goldstein, supra note 63.
141 R ostin Behnam, supra note 122.
142 See Self-Regulatory Organizations; Bats BZX Exchange, Inc.; Order Setting Aside Action by Delegated Authority and Disapproving a
Proposed Rule Change, as Modified by Amendments No. 1 and 2, To List and Trade Shares of the Winklevoss Bitcoin Trust, 83 Fed.
Reg. 37579 (Aug. 1, 2018). See also SEC, Self-Regulatory Organizations; Cboe BZX Exchange, Inc.; Order Disapproving a Proposed
Rule Change, as Modified by Amendment No. 1, To List and Trade Shares of the ARK 21 Shares Bitcoin ETF Under BZX Rule 14.11€(4),
Commodity-Based Trust Shares, 87 Fed. Reg. 20014 (Mar. 31, 2022), at 20017.
143 See, e.g., bitwise asset ManageMent, Presentation to the u.s. seCurities and exChange CoMMission (2019), https://www.sec.gov/comments/
sr-nysearca-2019-01/srnysearca201901-5164833-183434.pdf. See also CFTC, CFTC Orders Coinbase Inc. to Pay $6.5 Million for False,
Misleading, or Inaccurate Reporting and Wash Trading, (Release No. 8369-21, Mar. 19, 2021), https://www.cfc.gov/PressRoom/
PressReleases/8369-21.
32
being hacked, which could result in the total loss of funds. Further, some stablecoins do not grant U.S.
retail users any redemption rights, leaving them reliant on trading their stablecoins for U.S. dollars on
digital asset trading platforms.
DeFi borrowers are at risk of having their collateral liquidated and a loan terminated at any time
should the value of their collateral fall below a pre-determined liquidation threshold.144 Ofen,
liquidation may involve third-party liquidators that are incentivized to repay insuficiently
collateralized loans—however briefly—in exchange for acquiring some or all of borrowers’ collateral at
a discount.145 Users of platforms that recently entered bankruptcy have also reported that marketing
of certain crypto-asset platforms did not match the reality of the safety of their assets.146
Finally, many crypto-asset intermediaries and product contracts employ dispute resolution
mechanisms—such as arbitration clauses and class action bans—also utilized by traditional finance
companies, that inhibit consumers’ and investors’ ability to pursue legal claims.147
Operational Risks
Operational risk is defined generally as the risk of loss caused by flawed or failed processes, policies,
systems, or events.148 In the context of multilateral systems for settling and recording financial
transactions, this includes the risk that deficiencies in information systems or internal processes,
human errors, governance and management failures, or disruptions from external events will reduce,
deteriorate, or cause a breakdown in services provided. Such deficiencies in information systems or
processes also include errors or delays in processing, system outages, information security threats,
such as cyberattacks, insuficient capacity, fraud, data loss, and leakage (e.g., calculation errors,
omissions, and inaccuracies).149
When assets with substantial value reside and trade on permissioned or permissionless blockchains,
asset owners are reliant upon the blockchain systems for access to their digital property. Further,
crypto-asset systems use diferent technologies, transaction processes, and distributed governance
structures with novel features that may not be as robust as standards for mitigating operational risk
in registered markets.150 These characteristics of crypto-asset technology and products expose users
to unique operational risks. Some examples include the absence of reversal mechanisms or other
fail-safes for accidental or erroneous transactions, issues associated with the lack of blockchain
144 Liquidation of insuficiently collateralized DeFi loans usually happens automatically in real-time. For this reason, borrowers are
incentivized to post more collateral than the minimum required to avoid forced liquidation. See, e.g., sirio araMonte, sebastian doerr,
wenqian huang & andreas sChriMPf, supra note 58, at 2-3.
145 w orld eConoMiC foruM, supra note 118, at 18.
146 See, e.g., Molly White, Excerpts from letters to the judge in the Voyager Digital bankruptcy case, Mollywhite.net, (Jul. 23, 2022), https://
blog.mollywhite.net/voyager-letters. See also Molly White, Excerpts from letters to the judge in the Celsius Network bankruptcy case,
Mollywhite.net, (Jul. 22, 2022), https://blog.mollywhite.net/celsius-letters.
147 See Alexis Goldstein, supra note 63, at 3. See also Tamar Meshel & Moin A. Yahya, Crypto Dispute Resolution: An Empirical Study, Journal
of law, teChnology and PoliCy (Oct. 5, 2021), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3975500; Julie M. Moringiello &
Christopher K. Odinet, supra note 9, at 61-63.
148 S ee, e.g., bis, international ConVergenCe of CaPital MeasureMent and CaPital standards: a reVised fraMeworK 140 (2005), https://www.bis.org/publ/
bcbs118.html. See also 12 C.F.R. § 217.101.
149 b oard of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, federal reserVe PoliCy on PayMent systeM risK (2021), https://www.federalreserve.gov/
paymentsystems/files/psr_policy.pdf.
150 b is & oiCu-iosCo, PrinCiPles for finanCial MarKet infrastruCtures (2012), https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d101a.pdf.
33
interoperability – including those arising from flaws with cross-chain bridges, vulnerabilities
associated with private keys, and dificulties integrating blockchains with traditional or legacy
systems. Therefore, consumers, investors, and businesses should be aware that increasing use of
public blockchains as they currently exist exposes them to these new forms of risk.
General Features and Decentralized Governance
Public permissionless blockchains are ultimately forms of computer sofware and are subject to
sofware vulnerabilities.151 Among other things, blockchains may have sofware bugs and the sofware
may need to be continually updated to address such bugs and add features.152 Sofware is also
vulnerable to attack by hackers. While certain security features of the largest public blockchains such
as Bitcoin and Ethereum are considered strong, as the technology becomes more widely used, the
incentives for attacks may increase.153 Thus, cybersecurity practices and protections will need to keep
pace with the scale of adoption.
Public permissionless blockchains also are generally based on open-source sofware, meaning
sofware that allows for the inspection and modification of source code, is freely distributed, is
technologically neutral, and grants free subsidiary licensing rights.154 While this arrangement
increases the number of parties who may contribute to the continued development of the blockchain’s
source code, it may reduce incentives for timely critical fixes to the sofware. Solutions to strengthen
incentives for improved sofware development, such as core groups of developers that guide
development or compensation for developers that devote more time to the shared project, may also
introduce new problems such as conflicts of interest between the users of the network and the core
group of developers or sources of funding.155 In addition, alternative governance structures designed
to better align the interests of diferent constituencies may be subject to other vulnerabilities rooted in
their design.156
Smart contracts, which are widely used by many permissionless blockchains, also present risks as
they combine the features of generally being immutable and publicly viewable. Taken together, these
attributes pose several vulnerabilities that may be exploited by illicit actors to steal customer funds:
once an attacker finds a bug in a smart contract and exploits it, immutable smart contract protocols
limit developers’ ability to patch the exploited vulnerability, giving attackers more time to exploit the
vulnerability and steal assets.
Concerns with public permissionless blockchains are specific forms of the more general tension
between decentralized and centralized features of decision-making associated with public
151 Angela Walch, The Bitcoin Blockchain as Financial Market Infrastructure: A Consideration of Operational Risk, nyu Journal of legislation and
PubliC PoliCy (Vol. 18, 2015), at 855, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2579482.
152 S ee, e.g., github, Bitcoin, https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/labels/Bug.
153 A ngela Walch, supra note 151, at 863. For a more recent description of blockchain vulnerabilities and attack incentives, see, for example,
Huashan Chen, Marcus Pendleton, Laurent Njilla, & Shouhuai Xu, A Survey on Ethereum Systems Security: Vulnerabilities, Attacks, and
Defenses, aCM CoMPuting surVeys (Vol. 53 Issue 3, 2021), https://doi.org/10.1145/3391195.
154 C hris dibona, saM oCKMan, & MarK stone oPen sourCes: VoiCes froM the reVolution 171-188 (O’Reilly, 1999). See also oPen sourCe initiatiVe, The
Open Source Definition (Annotated), https://opensource.org/osd-annotated.
155 Angela Walch, supra note 151, at 879.
156 W ulf. A. Kaal, Blockchain-Based Corporate Governance, stanford Journal of bloCKChain law &PoliCy (Vol. 4 Issue 1, Aug. 23, 2019),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=3441904.
34
blockchains. While a more decentralized system may strengthen public blockchain projects by
spreading the benefits of consensus more widely once achieved, the costs of consensus increase with
decentralization and reduce the likelihood of it being achieved, creating a significant vulnerability that
limits the system’s suitability as a core operational feature or channel of a financial system.157
Security and Scalability Tradeofs and De-anonymization
A distributed ledger may be more secure because of its reduced centrality, but as more copies of the
ledger are distributed to new nodes, and more computational resources are required to reach protocol
consensus, transaction rates on the network slow down. This, in turn, reduces scale (unless a degree
of centralization arises to improve validation eficiency), which reduces security.158 While solutions are
emerging that seek to address scalability issues without sacrificing security, the main externality of the
computationally heavy process of storing and processing transactions on a blockchain remains.159
Issues with scalability of public blockchains manifest in unpredictable, volatile, and regressive fees
that are imposed on users. For example, high transaction demand and an increase in the Ethereum
gas price in May 2022 led to average daily transaction fees spiking to $196.68 versus a previous peak of
$69.92 in May 2021.160 Such high fees not only reduce utility of the public blockchain but also have a
regressive impact on users since high fees can make lower value transactions economically unfeasible.
Similarly, blockchain congestion can also cause transaction times to vary widely and reduce reliability
and utility for users.
One of the attractions of crypto-assets for users is the ability to perform transactions pseudonymously.
However, data analysis techniques have been developed that allow pseudonyms (hashes of public
keys) to be linked to the IP address where a transaction originates, potentially fatally undermining
the privacy of transactions on many public blockchains.161 Once a user’s wallet address is known,
every transaction related to that wallet is publicly visible, and attempts to obscure such transactions
are ofen easily unobscured with chain analysis tools. Even if one attempts to regain anonymity
through a separate wallet, significant eforts and precautions would need to be taken to maintain that
anonymity, including technological acumen that the average consumer may not possess.162
Peer-to-Peer Verification, Mining Pools, and Validation Incentives
Peer-to-peer verification protocols mean that, regardless of a blockchain’s transaction speed, there are
delays in processing transactions that can be on the order of tens of minutes between the execution of
157 Angela Walch, supra note 151, at 880.
158 See JosePh abadi & MarKus K. brunnerMeier, bloCKChain eConoMiCs (federal reserVe banK PhiladelPhia, Working Paper No. 22-15, 2022), https://ssrn.
com/abstract=4100197.
159 n iC Carter & linda Jeng, defi ProtoCol risKs: the Paradox of defi (risKbooKs, 2021), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3866699.
160 bitinfoCharts, Ethereum Avg. Transaction Fee Historical Chart, https://bitinfocharts.com/comparison/ethereum-transactionfees.html#3y.
161 S ince all transactions stored on the blockchain are immutable, the entire history of actions done with an address can be traced and
observed, although the identity of the person might be unknown. Should an address be linked with a person’s identity—for example,
by accidental disclosure or through the use of data analytics tools—there would be significant implications for that user’s privacy.
See alex biryuKoV, dMitry KhoVratoViCh & iVan PustogaroV, deanonyMisation of Clients in bitCoin P2P networK (arxiV, 2014), https://arxiv.org/
pdf/1405.7418.pdf. See also ferenC béres, istVán andrás seres, andrás a. benCzúr, & MiKerah quintyne-Collins, bloCKChain is watChing you: Profiling
and deanonyMizing ethereuM users (arxiV, 2020), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2005.14051.pdf.
162 M olly White, Abuse and harassment on the blockchain, Mollywhite.net (Jan. 22, 2022), https://blog.mollywhite.net/abuse-and-
harassment-on-the-blockchain.
35
a transaction and its publication to the network. These network delays in updating ledgers can cause
a mismatched ledger to be generated and result in possible losses by fraud, system attacks, double
spending, and fake transactions.163
Mining has become a specialized industry with a significant concentration of players in mining pools.164
If a mining pool were to control more than half of the total hash rate, it could lead to a 51% attack on
the network.165 Such attacks may arise from misaligned incentives of miners.166 Further, decisions
relating to the operation of a distributed ledger are made by the “core developers” of the sofware
for that ledger and by validators of transactions on the ledger who determine the definitive record of
ownership of crypto-assets on that ledger.167
In a PoS environment, the power to validate and assemble transactions into blocks is a function of
one’s share of all protocol tokens held, which can create incentives to collude. Such consolidation of
power may allow a validator to control which transactions can be included in the final ledger. Because
validators are typically rewarded with newly issued tokens, the consolidation of power through vote-
buying has been observed in some PoS blockchains.168 In PoW systems, miners also select, order, and
propose transactions to be added to the blockchain record, meaning miners can profit, for example,
from selling of earlier processing slots. This may afect the profitability of transactions and trigger or
delay transfers of ownership governed by smart contracts.169
Further, whether the consensus mechanism is PoS or PoW, miners are able to observe, select, and
reorganize transactions during the verification process, and routinely include, exclude, or re-order
transactions within the blocks they produce, therefore prioritizing transactions that pay higher
fees. This discretionary practice, referred to as “miner extractable value” (MEV), is both opaque and
potentially disadvantageous to users in the crypto-asset ecosystem. Indeed, some have observed that
activities that generate MEV can resemble front-running or other market manipulation that is harmful
to consumers and investors and have called for regulators to establish whether value extraction by
miners constitutes illegal activity.170
163 g areth w. Peters, ariane ChaPelle & efstathios Panayi, oPening disCussion on banKing seCtor risK exPosures and Vulnerabilities froM Virtual CurrenCies:
an oPerational risK PersPeCtiVe (arxiV, 2014), http://arxiv.org/pdf/1409.1451.pdf.
164 b loCKChain.CoM, Hashrate Distribution, https://www.blockchain.com/charts/pools.
165 “Hash rate” is a measure of computational power and refers to the number of cryptographic hash functions a processor can calculate in
a given time, usually denominated as hashes per second. See, e.g., dylan yaga, Peter Mell, niK roby & Karen sCarfone, bloCKChain teChnology
oVerView (nist, 2018), https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2018/NIST.IR.8202.pdf.
166 See Miles Carlsten, harry Kalodner, Matt weinberg & arVind narayanan, on the instability of bitCoin without the bloCK reward (PrinCeton uniVersity
dePartMent of eConoMiCs, 2016), https://economics.princeton.edu/working-papers/on-the-instability-of-bitcoin-without-the-block-reward.
See also eriC budish, the eConoMiC liMits of bitCoin and the bloCKChain (nber, Working Paper No. 24717, 2018), https://ericbudish.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/03/economic_limits_bitcoin_blockchain.pdf. See also antonio fatas, the eConoMiCs of finteCh and digital CurrenCies
39-45 (CePr Press, 2019), https://cepr.org/sites/default/files/publication-files/60138-the_economics_of_fintech_and_digital_currencies.
pdf.
167 Hilary J. Allen, DeFi: Shadow Banking 2.0?, williaM & Mary law reView (Feb. 18, 2022), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=4038788.
168 Brady Dale, Vote Buying Scandal Stokes Fears of EOS Governance Failure, CoindesK, (Oct. 3, 2018), https://www.coindesk.com/vitalik-
called-it-vote-buying-scandal-stokes-fears-of-eos-failure.
169 A ngela Walch, Professor of Law, St. Mary’s University School of Law, Written Testimony before the United States Senate Committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Afairs, (Jul. 27, 2021), https://www.banking.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Walch%20Testimony%207-27-21.pdf.
See also Hilary J. Allen, supra note 167.
170 r aPhael auer, et al., supra note 28, at 4.
36
The increasing use of public blockchains exposes users to new forms of risks. As detailed in Part VI, this
report recommends a multi-part approach to addressing these risks, including through the expanded
application of existing operational risk management standards, when possible, enhanced use of
supervisory guidance, as well as alerts to consumers, investors, and businesses to adopt improved
diligence tactics, and actions to ensure financial literacy on crypto-assets, including with respect to
operational risks that are unique to the crypto-asset ecosystem.
Risks in Crypto-asset Intermediation
In addition to conduct risks in the crypto-asset ecosystem and novel operational risks, there are also
traditional financial risks that have the potential to manifest in crypto-asset markets, with specific
implications given the dynamics of such markets. Crypto-assets, regardless of the range of financial
and non-financial characteristics they may have, are ofen created, marketed, traded, and custodied
using the same technology systems, security protocols, and financial and operational controls. The
unique exposures between crypto-asset entities and products may create a basis for heightened
concern. Namely, the firms acting as intermediaries, systems administrators, and other parties in
crypto-asset markets may not suficiently account for the negative externalities that could afect
these interconnected assets, firms, or activities, as compared to traditional financial firms whose non-
financial activities are ofen limited or subject to significant controls.
Consumers, investors, and businesses using crypto-assets are exposed to risks, as crypto-asset
intermediaries may lack—or have chosen not to dedicate or develop—adequate resources or
capabilities to perform their obligations, leading to a loss of value for the users, disruptions of the
afected customers’ businesses, and reduced confidence in the crypto-asset sector generally. The
resulting loss of confidence may also produce a local or generalized withdrawal of resources from
afected firms or activities, increasing the impact of the initial efects.171 The potential risks associated
with crypto-asset firms and market practices include those described below.
Resources and Capabilities Risks
The high volatility in the price of crypto-assets, including those used in lending and staking activities,
may increase the risk of margin calls on crypto-asset intermediaries, as well as follow-on collateral
liquidations if margin calls are not met. While some states regulate the safety and soundness of
crypto-asset firms licensed as non-banks, state laws do not address the national and international
scope of activities of these firms.172 As a result, capital and liquidity bufers to absorb and limit the
efects of financial shocks and imbalances may be insuficient to address the increasing risk of firm
failures and disruptions that may negatively impact consumers, investors, and businesses, particularly
for the many development-stage crypto-asset firms and projects.
Custody Risks
While crypto-asset third-party custody is a dynamic and rapidly developing field, there is currently
no comprehensive regime that protects consumers, investors, and businesses in the event of a
171 M iChael taylor, “twin PeaKs”: a regulatory struCture for the new Century (Centre for the study of finanCial innoVation, 1995).
172 Benjamin T. Seymour, The New Fintech Federalism, yale Journal of law & teChnology (Vol. 24, 2022), at 1, https://yjolt.org/sites/default/
files/seymour_-_the_new_fintech_federalism.pdf.
37
crypto-asset custodian’s insolvency and failure. Among other things, while many of the platform
models involve custody, the concept of “custody” for crypto-assets is diferent than for traditional
financial assets with which a customer may be familiar. Crypto-asset firms that appear to share
characteristics of traditional financial firms but whose operating companies take the position that,
or operate as if, they are unregulated may not qualify under provisions of the Bankruptcy Code,173 the
Uniform Commercial Code, and the Securities Investor Protection Act that provide legal certainty for
the treatment for traditional financial firms and financial contracts (e.g., commodity and securities
contracts involving brokers, financial institutions, and clearing agencies).174 Thus, if a crypto-asset
platform or other firm that custodies crypto-assets enters bankruptcy, customers may not be able
to access or liquidate their crypto-assets for months or years, if at all.175 Such risks are particularly
pronounced when an insolvent firm’s estate is concentrated in crypto-assets with volatile prices, which
may complicate the administration of the bankruptcy proceeding.
Crypto-asset third-party custodians may also hold customers’ keys in a centralized manner,
comingling customers’ funds with the custodian’s own crypto-asset funds and creating a dependency
of the customer on the custodian diferent than in more traditional financial custody relationships. If a
custody provider were to be reorganized or liquidated under the Bankruptcy Code, a bankruptcy court
may treat customers of the custodian as unsecured creditors who stand to lose some or all of their
investment.176 Custodians may also use sub-custodians, which further compounds risks to customers
by introducing a second layer of credit risk.177
Risk Exposures: Regulatory Non-Compliance and Evolving Market Oversight
Since the creation of crypto-assets, regulators and lawmakers have been applying existing financial
market regulatory frameworks to crypto-assets. Although there is no simple, one-sized approach to all
crypto-assets and related products and services, regulators have taken steps—through the issuance of
guidance and enforcement actions—that respond to questions, and further action is needed to ensure
a cohesive regulatory coverage.
173 Banking institutions and other depositories are subject to special resolution regimes in case of insolvency.
174 See, e.g., Philip D. Anker & George W. Shuster, Jr., Exceptional Insolvencies: Provisions of the Bankruptcy Code and SIPA Regarding Broker-
Dealers and Other Financial Market Participants and Contracts, wilMerhale (Sep. 17, 2008), https://www.wilmerhale.com/en/insights/
publications/exceptional-insolvencies-provisions-of-the-bankruptcy-code-and-sipa-regarding-broker-dealers-and-other-financial-
market-participants-and-contracts. See also Jeanne L. Schroeder, Bitcoin and the Uniform Commercial Code, uniVersity of MiaMi business
law reView (Vol. 24 Issue 1, Jun. 1, 2016), https://repository.law.miami.edu/umblr/vol24/iss3/3.
175 V icky Ge Huang, Celsius Customers Are Losing Hope for Their Locked-Up Crypto, the wall street Journal (Jul. 3, 2022), www.wsj.com/
articles/celsius-customers-are-losing-hope-for-their-locked-up-crypto-11656840601?mod=series_cryptobitcoindogecoin. See also Eliot
Brown & Yifan Wang, Crypto Broker Voyager Digital Files for Bankruptcy Protection, the wall street Journal (Jul. 6, 2022), https://www.wsj.
com/articles/crypto-broker-voyager-digital-files-for-bankruptcy-protection-11657098630?mod=hp_lead_pos4.
176 S idney P. Levinson, Caroline N. Swett, Alison M. Hashmall & Elie J. Worenklein, Recent Disclosure Guidance Highlights Growing Concern
Surrounding the Risks of User Assets Held by Various Crypto Custodians, debeVoise & PliMPton (Jun. 6, 2022), https://www.debevoise.
com/insights/publications/2022/06/recent-disclosure-guidance-highlights. Banks are subject to a distinct irresolution regime, as the
Bankruptcy Code precludes “banks” from being debtors. See Adam J. Levitin, Not Your Keys, Not Your Coins: Unpriced Credit Risk in
Cryptocurrency, texas law reView (Vol. 101, 2022), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4107019.
177 T he use of smart contracts and distributed applications in DeFi also means that even non-custodied holdings of crypto-assets may
be subject to new forms of intermediation risks and ineficiencies, such as those produced by the technical features of the sofware
programs themselves and ones resulting from actions taken by DAOs, validators, miners and other parties that influence outcomes
produced by smart contracts and distributed applications. See MiChael Casey, et al., supra note 43, at 4-5.
38
Questions around regulation and supervision of crypto-assets are complicated by the fact that some
actors within the crypto-asset ecosystem attempt to design markets, products, and services such that
they fall outside of the regulatory perimeter and actively dispute the application of existing laws and
regulations. At the same time, other intermediaries have sought guidance on the structure, delivery,
and reporting of crypto-asset activities to provide more regulatory certainty. This unique landscape
afects the relative exposure of consumers, investors, and businesses to the risks of digital assets,
markets, and technologies.
Current Legal and Regulatory Landscape for Crypto-assets
The current regulatory treatment of crypto-assets depends on the facts and circumstances of the
crypto-asset, the nature of the activities, and the classification of entities or service providers. U.S.
federal financial regulatory agencies with authority to address violations arising from the conduct risks
associated with crypto-assets may include market regulators, banking regulators, agencies responsible
for safeguarding the financial system from illicit use, and agencies with authority to enforce consumer
protection laws. In addition, state agencies, including state securities and banking regulators ofen
have authorities under state laws that apply to aspects of the crypto-asset ecosystem.178
The financial regulation, supervision, and enforcement framework is generally based upon the
following criteria:
(i) The product and service that is being provided. The CFTC primarily oversees commodity
derivatives and associated markets and intermediaries and maintains anti- fraud and anti-
manipulation enforcement over commodities that are not securities; the SEC oversees securities
and securities derivatives and their associated markets and intermediaries; and the Department
of Labor oversees the investment activities of retirement plan fiduciaries;
(ii) The entity providing the service. For example, the Federal Reserve oversees activities of bank
holding companies and state-chartered banks and savings associations that are members of the
Federal Reserve System; the OCC supervises national banks and federal savings associations;
and the FDIC is the federal supervisor for state-chartered banks and savings associations that
are not members of the Federal Reserve System; and
(iii) Whether an activity violates a civil or criminal statute. For example, the Department of Justice
prosecutes various types of securities, commodities, and crypto-asset-related criminal activities,
including various types of financial fraud.
The CFPB also regulates the ofering of consumer financial products and services—which, depending
on the facts and circumstances, may include a variety of crypto-asset related oferings—under the
federal consumer financial laws, including (among others) the Dodd-Frank Act’s prohibition against
unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices for consumer financial products and services. Notably,
no federal regulator currently has the authority to comprehensively oversee spot markets for crypto-
assets that are not securities and to issue regulations over those markets to ensure market integrity.179
178 See north aMeriCan seCurities adMinistrators assoCiation, NASAA Updates Coordinated Crypto Crackdown, (Aug. 7, 2019), https://www.nasaa.
org/52027/nasaa-updates-coordinated-crypto-crackdown-2/?qoid=current-headlines.
179 A more detailed discussion of the regulatory treatment of crypto-assets and potential gaps, especially regarding financial stability, may
be found in the forthcoming report of the Financial Stability Oversight Council in response to the Section 6 of the Executive Order.
39
Efects of Legal and Regulatory Non-Compliance
Notwithstanding the eforts of these legal and regulatory authorities, consumers, investors, and
businesses remain exposed to risks, some of which arise from misconduct by bad actors, while others
occur when products and services are not in compliance with regulatory requirements, regardless of
intent. In particular, risks arise from non-compliance with (i) the extensive disclosure requirements
for registered exchanges, products, and intermediaries that are designed to provide investors and
customers with material and relevant information and (ii) the requirements around market conduct
that are designed to provide fair, orderly, and eficient markets.
Some traditional financial activities and consumer financial products and services, as well as native
crypto-asset firms also may view themselves—and thus operate as if—their crypto-asset activities
are not subject to federal laws and regulations. This could result in crypto-asset-based activities that
are economically, but not necessarily legally, equivalent to traditional financial activities exposing
consumers, investors, and businesses to significant economic risks because they are not regulated in
an equivalent manner. For example, despite the apparent analogy to traditional savings and deposit
accounts, crypto-asset platforms may restrict withdrawals and are not covered by deposit insurance.180
Users of these crypto-asset products may be unaware of such diferences and therefore be less likely
to take actions that could reduce their risk exposures. Further, crypto-asset users — or those who
use intermediaries—that are out of compliance with laws and regulations generally are not receiving
required disclosures regarding issues such as conflicts of interests, risks, and fees.
Efects of Changes in the Scope and Application of Laws and Regulations
Crypto-assets are rapidly developing, and the extent to which crypto-asset products, services,
and technologies are, or should be, subject to certain U.S. laws and regulations covering conduct,
operational, and intermediation risks is being actively debated. To some proponents of crypto-
assets, a key goal underlying the creation and development of the crypto-asset ecosystem is the
establishment of a peer-to-peer financial system that would eliminate the reliance on large incumbent
intermediaries, such as banks and other traditional centralized institutions. Some extend that goal to
avoiding the oversight associated with those traditional institutions.
While these perspectives are animating the public discourse regarding crypto-assets, consumers,
investors, and businesses may be exposed to heightened risk from unproven features and design flaws
in crypto-asset products and services. The regulatory regimes for these products and services are also
still evolving.
As described in more detail in Part VI, Recommendations, regulatory agencies should use their existing
authorities to address current and emerging risks in crypto-asset intermediation to the extent that
such activities fall within their jurisdictions. Examples include the OCC’s interpretive letters to clarify
180 The SEC has brought an enforcement action against a crypto-lending product for failure to properly register. See SEC, BlockFi Agrees
to Pay $100 Million in Penalties and Pursue Registration of its Crypto Lending Product, (Feb.14, 2022), https://www.sec.gov/news/
press-release/2022-26. The FDIC has also issued cease and desist orders against crypto-asset companies for misstating whether their
products or services are covered by federal deposit insurance. See fdiC, FDIC Issues Cease and Desist Letters to Five Companies For
Making Crypto-Related False or Misleading Representations about Deposit Insurance, (Aug. 19, 2022), https://www.fdic.gov/news/press-
releases/2022/pr22060.html.
40
the expectations of its regulated entities regarding the safeguarding of crypto-assets for customers;
the SEC’s special purpose broker-dealer statement on digital asset custody, which lays out certain
circumstances in which the SEC will not take certain enforcement action against broker-dealers with
respect to digital asset securities; and the Department of Labor’s compliance assistance release
cautioning retirement plan fiduciaries to be mindful of their stringent obligations of prudence and
loyalty in connection with investments in cryptocurrencies.
V. OPPORTUNITIES AND RISKS FOR POPULATIONS VULNERABLE
TO DISPARATE IMPACTS
As discussed above, crypto-assets present a variety of potential opportunities and known and
emerging risks for consumers, investors, and businesses. The nature and intensity of these risks and
opportunities varies across populations and communities. This is due both to underlying social and
economic factors (for example, wealth disparities, historic exclusion from the financial system, and
uneven digital access), as well as crypto-asset-specific behaviors, including marketing practices that
may be inappropriately targeting specific communities, potentially in an unfair or abusive manner.
This part of the report identifies some of the benefits and opportunities that populations most
vulnerable to disparate impacts may experience from the growth of the crypto-asset ecosystem. This
part also discusses the unique risks that crypto-assets may present to these communities and notes
risks identified elsewhere in this report that are likely to impact certain populations in disparate ways.
For the purposes of this analysis, we consider populations most vulnerable to disparate impacts
to include the low-income population, communities that have been historically excluded from
the financial system or subject to discrimination in accessing financial services or wealth-building
opportunities, including Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) communities, as well as
unbanked and underbanked populations,181 the elderly, and children. Not all populations vulnerable
to disparate impacts are alike, and there is substantial variation both within and across communities
and individuals. Certain individuals might be considered vulnerable to disparate impact due to
high exposure relative to disposable income, such as low-income individuals. Others may have an
increased likelihood of encountering bias and discrimination, such as BIPOC individuals. Some elderly
individuals may have less familiarity with digital oferings and may be more susceptible to fraud and
scams. Children may be more impressionable and thus less prone to question targeted marketing.
Disparate impacts are also likely to vary by crypto-asset ofering, with diferent products and services
potentially posing diferent opportunities and risks for users.
Some market participants have been promoting crypto-assets to those who lack access as a means
to advance financial inclusion and build wealth, with the stated promise to serve as an alternative,
or an entry point, to the banking system and traditional financial services. Specifically, some
advocates have argued that crypto-assets can facilitate broader access to investment opportunities
and potentially lower-cost, more accessible, financial products. There is limited data on the crypto-
asset use and experience of populations vulnerable to disparate impacts. However, available
181 As used in this report, “unbanked” refers to individuals without a bank account; “underbanked” refers to individuals with a bank account
who make use of alternative financial services ofered by non-bank firms, such as money orders, bill payments services, and check
cashing.
41
evidence to date suggests that potential financial inclusion benefits of crypto-assets largely have yet
to materialize, and crypto-asset products may present increased risks to populations vulnerable to
disparate impacts.
Populations vulnerable to disparate impact are engaging with crypto-assets. Survey data from the
Federal Reserve Board finds that 29% of respondents who held crypto-assets for investment purposes
had an annual household income of less than $50,000.182 Additionally, certain BIPOC communities
may be over-represented in crypto-asset ownership or may be more likely than white individuals to
own crypto-assets.183 As explored below, elderly individuals have been targeted in fraud schemes and
scams, and children have been targeted in marketing campaigns. Given these current risks, greater
urgency in examining and responding to the potential disparate impacts of crypto-asset activities is
warranted.
Potential Opportunities for Populations Vulnerable to Disparate Impacts
Some proponents argue that crypto-assets present opportunities to expand access to financial
services, improve upon existing services by reducing transaction costs, and build wealth. However,
evidence currently available indicates that realization of such benefits has been limited to date.
Expanded Access to Financial Services
There have long been gaps in access to financial services, resulting both from logistical and cost
challenges in reaching consumers with afordable access to the products they need, and from a history
of institutional discrimination through racist policies and practices that have had lasting systemic
impacts that have limited access to financial services and wealth building opportunities for many BIPOC
individuals.184 To this day, unbanked and underbanked rates are higher among lower-income and Black
and Hispanic adults.185 Within this context, some market observers highlight the potential for crypto-
assets to address financial inequities and provide more inclusive access to financial services.186
182 b oard of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, supra note 53, at 45.
183 Andrew Perrin, supra note 54; and Morning Consult, The State of Consumer Banking & Payments, (2022), https://go.morningconsult.
com/rs/850-TAA-511/images/220120_State_of_Consumer_Banking.pdf. See also Terri Bradford, The Cryptic Nature of Black Consumer
Cryptocurrency Ownership, federal reserVe banK of Kansas City (Jun. 1, 2022), https://www.kansascityfed.org/research/payments-system-
research-briefings/the-cryptic-nature-of-black-consumer-cryptocurrency-ownership.
184 S ee Rocio Sanchez-Moyano and Bina Patel Shrimali, The Racialized Roots of Financial Exclusion, federal reserVe banK of san franCisCo (Aug.
19, 2021), https://www.frbsf.org/community-development/publications/community-development-investment-review/2021/august/
the-racialized-roots-of-financial-exclusion. See also Kristen Broady, Mac McComas & Amine Ouazad, An Analysis of Financial Institutions
in Black-Majority Communities: Black Borrowers and Depositors Face Considerable Challenges in Accessing Banking Services, brooKings
institution (Nov. 2, 2021), https://www.brookings.edu/research/an-analysis-of-financial-institutions-in-black-majority-communities-
black-borrowers-and-depositors-face-considerable-challenges-in-accessing-banking-services. See also Kevin Fox Gotham,
Race, Mortgage Lending and Loan Rejections in a U.S. City, soCiologiCal foCus (Vol. 31 No. 4, 1998), at 392-94, https://www.jstor.org/
stable/20832008. See also Jung Hyun Choi and Peter J. Mattingly, What Diferent Denial Rates Can Tell Us About Racial Disparities in the
Mortgage Market, urban institute (Jan. 13, 2022), https://www.urban.org/urban-wire/what-diferent-denial-rates-can-tell-us-about-racial-
disparities-mortgage-market. See also Pew Charitable trusts, who borrows, where they borrow, and why 9 (2012), https://www.pewtrusts.
org/-/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2012/pewpaydaylendingreportpdf.pdf; and Pew Charitable trusts, the CoMPlex story of
aMeriCan debt 4-5 (2015), https://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/assets/2015/07/reach-of-debt-report_artfinal.pdf.
185 Unbanked and underbanked rates are also higher among adults with less education. See board of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM,
supra note 53, at 43-44.
186 S ee, e.g., world eConoMiC foruM, what is the Value ProPosition of stableCoins for finanCial inClusion? 11-12 (2021), https://www3.weforum.org/
docs/WEF_Value_Proposition_of_Stablecoins_for_Financial_Inclusion_2021.pdf.
42
According to data from one survey, a greater share of unbanked and underbanked individuals may
own crypto-assets than individuals considered “fully banked.”187 Early evidence also suggests that
unbanked individuals may be more inclined to use crypto-assets for transactions, indicating they may
be interested in crypto-assets as an alternative means to accessing basic financial services.188 Most
individuals who have owned crypto-assets have done so for investment purposes, and 99% of those
who invested in crypto-assets—but did not use it for transactions—had a bank account.189 Of the small
percentage of adults who had used crypto-assets for transactions, 13% were unbanked, compared to
6% of adults who had not used crypto-assets.190
These findings suggest an over-representation of unbanked individuals using crypto-assets for
transactions; they also indicate that 87% of the small percentage of adults who are using crypto-
assets for transactions have a bank account. The motivations for individuals—particularly banked
individuals—to use crypto-assets for transactions are unclear, particularly given transaction costs and
market volatility may limit the utility of crypto-assets as a medium of exchange. Transaction usage
by both banked and unbanked individuals is very limited, yet it appears that some small portion of
individuals who are underserved by the mainstream financial system may be using crypto-assets to
engage in transactions.
To understand the broader opportunity for crypto-assets to expand access to financial services, it is
important to consider the reasons some individuals remain outside of the banking system. According
to data from the FDIC, the top five reasons for individuals being unbanked—ranking in order of most
commonly cited—are: (i) insuficient funds to meet minimum balance requirements, (ii) lack of trust in
banks, (iii) privacy concerns, (iv) high bank account fees, and (v) lack of predictability of bank account
fees.191 It is still unclear to what degree crypto-asset based financial solutions might address these
concerns and expand access for unbanked individuals.
To a certain degree, broader economic disparities underlie the specific disparities in access to, and
use of, financial services.192 Financial needs, such as the lack of suficient resources to meet minimum
balance requirements, cannot be addressed through financial services oferings—crypto-asset-based
or otherwise. Instead, they require solutions that directly address the underlying economic issues.193
With regard to issues of trust and privacy concerns, some crypto-asset proponents argue that
consumers and businesses may be more inclined to trust crypto-assets due to the decentralized and
187 Charlotte Principato, Banking the Unbanked Requires Raising Trust and Awareness. For the Underbanked, Better Service Means
Payments Innovation, Morning Consult (Aug. 17, 2021), https://morningconsult.com/2021/08/17/trust-awareness-paynents-unbanked-
underbanked. The survey found that 37% of underbanked and 12% of unbanked individuals owned cryptocurrency, compared to 10%
of individuals considered fully banked. See also board of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, supra note 53, at 45-46.
188 b oard of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, supra note 53, at 45-46.
189 I d. In total, the survey found that 12% of adults had held or used cryptocurrencies in the past 12 months; 11% of adults had held
cryptocurrency as an investment, while just 2% had used cryptocurrency to buy something or make a payment and 1% to send money
to friends or family.
190 Id.
191 fdiC, how aMeriCa banKs: household use of banKing and finanCial serViCes 17 (2019), https://www.fdic.gov/analysis/household-
survey/2019report.pdf.
192 See board of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, supra note 53, at 43.
193 Abbye Atkinson, Rethinking Credit as Social Provision, stanford law reView (May 2019), at 1093-1162, https://review.law.stanford.edu/wp-
content/uploads/sites/3/2019/05/Atkinson-71-Stan.-L.-Rev.-1093-2019.pdf.
43
pseudonymous nature of transactions and distribution and lack of traditional intermediaries. Trust
in crypto-assets may be undermined by the risks related to operational issues, market volatility,
targeting for fraud and scams, and privacy. 194 Additionally, many crypto-asset systems increasingly
rely on centralized intermediaries and traditional financial institutions to carry out their functions or
at a minimum to convert between crypto-assets and fiat currency. This may weaken the appeal of
crypto-assets as an alternative for those who remain unbanked due to a lack of trust in such financial
institutions, and more broadly inhibit unbanked individuals from accessing crypto-assets.195
Another challenge to the opportunity for crypto-assets to expand access is the “digital divide,” the gap
between those who have ready access to computers, smartphones, and the internet, and those who do
not. Underbanked individuals and individuals more broadly who face barriers to mainstream financial
services, including those with lower income and those who identify as BIPOC, are ofen more likely to
lack access to certain technology services and infrastructure.196
It is certainly the case that most, if not all, financial market intermediaries could improve reach and
access to afordable financial products and services that meet the needs of consumers and businesses.
To date, it appears that little progress has been accomplished through the use of crypto-asset based
oferings as a means of greater financial inclusion. Only an estimated 1% of adults use crypto-assets
exclusively for non-investment purposes,197 and just 12% of unbanked individuals own crypto-assets
at all.198 Additionally, the ability of crypto-asset based financial services to address the concerns
currently inhibiting individuals’ use of mainstream financial services remains unclear, and the digital
divide remains a challenge.
Reduced Transaction Costs
Crypto-assets may ofer a means to provide users with lower-cost payment mechanisms, reducing
bank fees, transfer fees and other costs. While this could prove a benefit to all users, individuals for
whom such fees have been economically burdensome, or have inhibited their access to financial
services, could particularly stand to benefit.199 As noted, high and unpredictable costs are among
194 See world eConoMiC foruM, supra note 186, at 16, 22.
195 Kristin N. Johnson, Decentralized Finance: Regulating Cryptocurrency Exchanges, williaM & Mary law reView (Vol. 62 Issue 6, 2021), at 1911,
1921, https://scholarship.law.wm.edu/wmlr/vol62/iss6/4. See world eConoMiC foruM, supra note 186, at 13 (noting the “[l]ack of first- and
last-mile infrastructure for conversions between physical cash and digital money” as a limitation on stablecoins’ financial inclusion
prospects). Suggested alternatives to banks for storing crypto-assets include the use of gif cards, a credit card, or crypto-ATMs. See Kat
Tretina, How to Buy Cryptocurrency, forbes adVisor (May 15, 2022), https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/cryptocurrency/how-to-
buy-cryptocurrency.
196 As of 2019, just 33.8% of unbanked households had home internet access, compared to 82.6% of banked households. See fdiC,
how aMeriCa banKs: household use of banKing and finanCial serViCes aPPendix tables 48 (2019), https://www.fdic.gov/analysis/household-
survey/2019appendix.pdf. See also Sara Atske & Andrew Perrin, Home broadband adoption, computer ownership vary by race, ethnicity in
the U.S., Pew researCh Center (Jul. 16, 2021), https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/07/16/home-broadband-adoption-computer-
ownership-vary-by-race-ethnicity-in-the-u-s. See also world eConoMiC foruM, supra note 186, at 13, 16.
197 board of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, supra note 53, at 45-46.
198 C harlotte Principato, supra note 187.
199 S ee Ying Lei Toh, When Paying Bills, Low-Income Consumers Incur Higher Costs, federal reserVe banK of Kansas City (Nov. 23, 2021), https://
www.kansascityfed.org/research/payments-system-research-briefings/when-paying-bills-low-income-consumers-incur-higher-costs.
See also Aaron Klein, Senior Fellow, Brookings Institution, Opening statement of Aaron Klein at roundtable on America’s unbanked and
underbanked (Dec. 15, 2021), https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/opening-statement-of-aaron-klein-at-roundtable-on-americas-
unbanked-and-underbanked.
44
the most significant reasons individuals cited for being unbanked.200 Thus the potential for reduced
transaction costs presents a significant opportunity to increase financial inclusion.
While there is not currently suficient data to comprehensively evaluate whether the crypto-asset
ecosystem generally provides lower-fee financial services than traditional banking, international
financial transactions provide an example that may be instructive. Costs for these transactions tend to
be high; the average cost of remittances under $200—which is ofen typical for low-income migrants—
are on average 7% for a money transfer and can be as high as 15–20% of the principal in smaller
migration corridors.201 In addition, despite arguments that crypto-assets could facilitate cheaper and
faster remittance payments, evidence suggests that many international crypto-asset transfers are
not currently cost-efective, faster, or easier alternatives to cash, especially given the complexity of
converting crypto-assets to and from local currencies.202 The additional costs related to exchanging
between fiat and cryptocurrencies alone can make such transactions more expensive than non-crypto-
asset alternatives.203 These fees are ofen compounded by fees paid to miners to validate transactions,
and fees for matching buy and sell orders, which can be prohibitively expensive, particularly for small
transactions.204 According to analysts at crypto-asset platforms, the typical transaction price, or gas,
on the Ethereum network can fluctuate widely depending on network congestion.205 This limited
evidence suggests that the potential benefits of reduced transaction prices on crypto-asset based
payments systems have yet to be realized.
Potential Opportunities to Build Wealth
As noted earlier, the majority of individuals who own crypto-assets do so for investment purposes.206
Some members of communities historically excluded from wealth-building opportunities, including
many BIPOC individuals, perceive crypto-assets as an opportunity to build wealth and narrow the
racial wealth gap.207 The view that crypto-assets can help build wealth has been particularly attractive
to members of historically excluded communities who have some amount of financial stability
but may lack access to the range of wealth-building investment products that come with being an
accredited investor or accessing professional investment advice.
200 FDIC, supra note 191, at 17. See also Cities for finanCial eMPowerMent fund, Cfe fund banK on Coalition PlaybooK (2021), https://issuu.com/
cfefund/docs/bank_on_playbook_jan_2017. The report finds that prevalent reasons given cited by unbanked people for not having a
bank account are “not having enough money to keep in an account” (43%) and “bank fees are too high” (32%).
201 Dilip Ratha, Remittances: Funds for the Folks Back Home, international Monetary fund (Feb. 24, 2020), https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/
f/fandd/basics/remitt.htm.
202 See, e.g., Dirk G. Baur & Thomas Dimpfl, The Volatility of Bitcoin and Its Role as a Medium of Exchange and a Store of Value, eMPiriCal
eConoMiCs (Vol. 61, Jan. 5, 2021), at 2663–2683, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00181-020-01990-5.
203 S ee Alexis Goldstein, Director of Financial Policy, Open Markets Institute, Written Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Afairs (Dec.14, 2021), at 10, https://www.banking.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Goldstein%20Testimony%2012-14-21.pdf.
Moving into and out of stablecoins can add to the foreign exchange transaction fees involved in remitting money. When accounting for
these “double-hop” costs, total fees incurred by utilizing stablecoins and digital exchanges (ranging from $5.98 to $86.44) can be more
expensive than fees associated a payment system like Western Union ($4.88).
204 Paul Vigna, Crypto and Its Many Fees: What to Know About the Hidden Costs of Digital Currency, the wall street Journal (Dec. 18, 2021),
https://www.wsj.com/articles/crypto-and-its-many-fees-what-to-know-about-the-hidden-costs-of-digital-currency-11639825202.
205 Id.
206 board of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, supra note 53, at 45-46. In total, the survey found that 12% of adults had held or
used cryptocurrencies in the past 12 months; 11% of adults had held cryptocurrency as an investment, while just 2% had used
cryptocurrency to buy something or make a payment and 1% to send money to friends or family.
207 Taylor Nicole Rogers, Crypto collapse reverberates widely among black American investors, finanCial tiMes (Jul. 4, 2022), https://www.
f.com/content/47d338e2-3d3c-40ce-8a09-abfa25c16a7f.
45
However, such communities may be inappropriately targeted by crypto-asset marketing, as well as
fraud schemes, as explored in the part below exploring potential risks. Ultimately, the wealth-building
potential of crypto-assets is highly uncertain, and some have expressed concern that disproportionate
exposure by BIPOC communities could further exacerbate the racial wealth gap when crypto-asset
markets decline.208 Additionally, these markets have been highly volatile, which could pose concerns
particularly for individuals with lower incomes. These risks are explored below.
Potential Risks to Populations Vulnerable to Disparate Impacts
Diferent populations and individuals vulnerable to disparate impacts may be subject to greater harms
depending on the nature of the particular risks of engaging with crypto-assets. Some may be more
exposed to the volatility and risk of crypto-asset investing; others may be at greater risk of being
preyed upon by targeted marketing, fraud, and scams; and still others may be more limited in their
capacity to recover from financial harm.
Market Volatility and Inadequate Disclosures
Crypto-assets are subject to large price fluctuations, and consumer advocacy groups have warned of
the lack of adequate consumer protection.209 In many ways, the risks associated with owning crypto-
assets are the same for everyone. However, individuals with less resources, including lower-income
individuals, may have greater exposure in relation to their disposable income, meaning incurred
losses could have an outsized negative impact on their financial well-being. As noted above, 29% of
respondents who held crypto-assets for investment purposes had an annual household income of less
than $50,000.210
Market volatility and a lack of protections or suficient risk disclosures could also undermine trust
in crypto-assets, particularly among populations vulnerable to disparate impacts, some of whom
may be particularly wary of financial markets and institutions. Unexpected losses due to market
movements and a lack of understanding of potential exposure could undermine consumer trust and
confidence in the crypto-asset ecosystem.211 This deterioration in trust may have the potential to drive
further negative impact on the asset’s price. These dynamics are analogous to those experienced
in the U.S. banking system prior to the development of the modern regime of banking law and
regulation.212 During Reconstruction, many Black Americans were led to believe that their deposits in
the Freedman’s Savings Bank were guaranteed by the federal government. Black Americans’ trust in
financial institutions was afected by the deposits they lost when the bank collapsed and depositors’
208 Paulina Cachero, Crypto Collapse Threatens to Leave Black, Hispanic Investors Further Behind, blooMberg law (Jul. 7, 2022), https://news.
bloomberglaw.com/banking-law/crypto-collapse-threatens-to-leave-black-hispanic-investors-further-behind.
209 See, e.g., National Consumer Law Center, Comments to Department of the Treasury Ofice of the Comptroller of the Currency on the
Advance notice of proposed rulemaking on National Bank and Federal savings Association Digital Activities (Aug. 3, 2020), at 19-20,
https://www.nclc.org/images/pdf/rulemaking/2020-OCC-fintech-NCLC-comments.pdf.
210 b oard of goVernors of the federal reserVe systeM, supra note 53, at 45.
211 w orld eConoMiC foruM, supra note 186. See also Joe Weisenthal, Mark Cuban Calls for Stablecoin Regulation Afer Trading Token That
Crashed to Zero, blooMberg (Jun. 17, 2021), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-06-17/mark-cuban-defi-iron-finance-
crashed-100?sref=M8H6LjUF#xj4y7vzkg; Elizabeth Lopatto, The Tether Controversy, Explained, the Verge (Aug. 16, 2021), https://www.
theverge.com/22620464/tether-backing-cryptocurrency-stablecoin.
212 G ary B. Gorton & Jefrey Zhang, Taming Wildcat Stablecoins, uniVersity of ChiCago law reView (Vol. 90, Forthcoming 2022), https://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3888752.
46
funds were lost.213 Researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City have argued that the
collapse of a crypto-asset platform, and the resulting loss of customer funds, could be comparable to
“a 21st century version of Freedman’s Savings Bank.”214
Targeting
Marketing
In the past, vulnerable communities, especially low-income communities and communities of color,
have been specifically targeted by financial services companies using deceptive sales tactics and
marketing.215 There are several examples where crypto-asset companies are conducting similar
marketing practices to particular populations, including those most vulnerable to disparate impact.
Targeted advertising and brand partnerships with prominent athletes and celebrities have been
used to attract new customers to crypto-assets, with a particular focus on underserved and racial
minority communities.216 Recent surveys suggest that market participants believe that crypto-asset
advertisements have been efective at raising awareness of, and encouraging more people to trade
in, crypto-assets.217 Another example is the prevalence of crypto-asset ATMs (predominantly Bitcoin
ATMs, or BTMs) in lower-income neighborhoods that lack bank branches.218
Crypto-asset products may be marketed in ways that obscure their level of risk, which could
exacerbate the impact of targeted marketing on vulnerable communities. As discussed in Parts II and
IV, some crypto-assets and related products market themselves as safe and deposit-like, when they are
actually volatile and lack protections including deposit insurance. As a result, consumers, especially
those heavily targeted by crypto-asset marketing, might be at risk of viewing crypto-assets as stable
consumer financial products, rather than as speculative financial assets, and therefore investing
money they are not expecting, and may not be able to aford, to lose.219 In the case of BTMs, concerns
have also been raised regarding high fees and lack of adequate regulation.220
Recent studies have also shown that children are being exposed to crypto-assets at an early age and
are ofen more familiar with them than their parents. One such study noted that 57% of kids surveyed
213 Terri Bradford, supra note 183, at 3.
214 Id., at 4.
215 Examples include the prevalence of subprime mortgage originations and refinancing in communities of color prior to the financial crisis
in 2008. See Linda E. Fisher, Target Marketing of Subprime Loans: Racialized Consumer Fraud & Reverse Redlining, Journal of law and PoliCy,
(Vol. 18, 2009), https://brooklynworks.brooklaw.edu/jlp/vol18/iss1/3.
216 See Taylor Nicole Rogers, Crypto Collapse Reverberates Widely Among Black American Investors, finanCial tiMes, July 5, 2022, https://www.
f.com/content/47d338e2-3d3c-40ce-8a09-abfa25c16a7f.
217 S ee Terri Bradford, supra note 183, at 4.
218 See Susannah Luthi, Why Bitcoin ATMs are Vexing Rulemakers, PolitiCo (Jul. 6, 2022), https://www.politico.com/news/
magazine/2022/07/06/bitcoin-atms-regulations-00035083; see also Susan Tompor, Bitcoin ATMs Showing Up In Odd Spots Across
Metro Detroit, detroit free Press (Jun. 2018), https://www.freep.com/story/money/personal-finance/susan-tompor/2018/06/28/
bitcoin-atm-stock-cryptocurrency-value/629133002; see also Andy Peters, Bitcoin ATMs Start To Spread — And To Draw Scrutiny, atlanta
Journal-Constitution (Feb. 14, 2020), https://www.ajc.com/business/personal-finance/bitcoin-atms-start-spread-and-draw-scrutiny/
ZTbMPUOoc0LBlbgC4CLJoI.
219 This concern could extend, for example, to messaging that equates machines that enable consumer to buy and sell crypto assets to
ATMs that allow them to deposit funds into a bank account.
220 See Susannah Luthi, supra note 218.
47
were familiar with crypto-assets (compared to 47% of their parents) and if given $100, 57% of kids
said they would invest their money in crypto-assets (compared to 38% who would invest in stocks).221
Some high schools have begun to incorporate study of crypto-assets into their financial literacy eforts
and there are crypto-focused kids camps that provide children with a laptop, cellphone, and a digital
wallet.222 The marketing of crypto-assets has extended to the launch of a children’s show that uses
NFTs to cast the shows stars,223 NFT collections that are designed for children,224 and a kids-based
crypto-asset piggybank app and debit card.225
Fraud and Scams
While data is limited regarding specific victims of fraud or scams, it is clear that at least one population
vulnerable to disparate impacts, the elderly, are being targeted.
At just over 34% of the U.S. population, older Americans are becoming an ever-increasing target
for online fraud and scams (including cryptocurrency scams).226 Older Americans are generally
at or past their peak of their wealth accumulation, are more likely to be isolated and emotionally
vulnerable, may not understand current technologies, and therefore may be targets of frauds and
scams.227 Additionally, financially vulnerable older Americans that lack financial and housing security
are generally more likely to take unnecessary risks and fall prey to frauds and scams in the hope of
improving their financial condition.228 In 2021, the FBI received more than 5,100 complaints involving
some form of crypto-assets, with losses totaling over $241 million, from persons over the age of 60.229
Recent data also suggests that older Americans that are victims of typical online scams (e.g., tech
support and romance scams) are increasingly being asked to pay in cryptocurrencies, which are traded
through private wallets using public exchanges and can be dificult to trace.230
There are also indications that servicemembers are being targeted. Consumer complaints to the CFPB
show that crypto-assets are rising as a preferred payment method for scams targeting servicemembers
through identity thef or romance scams. Hundreds of published servicemember complaints to the
221 t . rowe PriCe, Families’ Excitement for Cryptocurrency Brings Risks and Opportunities, (Apr. 5, 2022), https://www.troweprice.com/content/
dam/trowecorp/Press%20Release%20-%20PKM22_release_FINAL%2004052022.pdf.
222 S ophie Bearman, The Crypto Craze is Here to Stay – Now it’s Even Being Taught in High School, CNBC, (Feb. 2018), https://www.cnbc.
com/2018/02/07/bitcoin-education-at-high-schools-and-colleges.html. See also CryPto Kids CaMP, Educating Future Leaders, https://www.
cryptokidscamp.org; laVner eduCation, Crypto Camps & Courses for Kids, https://www.lavnercampsandprograms.com/crypto-camps-and-
courses-for-kids.
223 C actus World, Cactus World to Launch First NFT Kids TV Show, (Jan. 4, 2022), https://www.einnews.com/pr_news/559611329/cactus-
world-to-launch-first-nf-kids-tv-show.
224 zigazoo, Zigazoo NFT Guide, https://www.zigazoo.com/nf-guide.
225 PIGZBE App, https://www.finh.cc/pigzbe-app.
226 Karen Kali, Age-Friendly Banking & Low- To Moderate-Income Older Adults, national CoMMunity reinVestMent Coalition (Nov. 2019), https://
ncrc.org/afb-standards/#_edn2.
227 M arguerite DeLiema, Martha Deevy, Annamaria Lusardi & Olivia S Mitchell, Financial Fraud Among Older Americans: Evidence and
Implications, national library of MediCine (2020), at 861-868, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7328021.
228 J oint Center for housing studies of harVard uniVersity, Housing America’s Older Adults 2019, (2019), https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/
default/files/Harvard_JCHS_Housing_Americas_Older_Adults_2019.pdf.
229 Federal bureau of inVestigation, Elder Fraud Report 2021, (2021), https://www.justice.gov/file/1523276/download#:~:text=The%20
number%20of%20elderly%20victims,over%20losses%20reported%20in%202020.
230 Michal Gromek, Digital Investment Fraud Wave Hits Seniors, forbes (Oct. 31, 2019), https://www.forbes.com/sites/
michalgromek/2019/10/31/digital-investment-fraud-wave-hits-seniors/?sh=3ace68102780.
48
CFPB involved crypto-assets or crypto platforms in the last two years.231
Privacy and Surveillance Risks
Despite generally purported benefits of increased privacy with crypto-asset transactions, as discussed
above, it is possible to use data aggregation techniques to uncover users’ wallet addresses and track
every transaction related to that wallet. Ledger instruments like digital wallets record payments
“on the books,” and DLT systems increasingly rely on centralized intermediaries, meaning that many
crypto-asset systems require an operator who sees that money’s movement on the ledger.232 As
a result, ledger distribution modulates, but does not eliminate, the ability to track ledger money,
undermining the claim that DLT can provide greater anonymity than traditional bank accounts
or bearer instruments, such as physical cash and coins. The absence of anonymity may dissuade
members of some communities who place a high value on privacy from engaging with crypto-asset
products and services.
Crypto-asset companies also have the ability to collect a variety of their users’ financial, technical,
and personal data.233 Such information may be shared with, or collected from, third-party companies,
and these policies may not always be disclosed clearly to the consumer.234 In addition, crypto-asset
companies have the potential to use payments data and digital transactions to gather sensitive data
about consumers’ behavior, which may expose individuals to unwanted tracking and other privacy
violations, worsening existing economic and social disparities. In addition, it has been reported that a
digital crypto-asset platform has entered into a contract allowing a government agency to access data
caches containing information, including geo-tracking to monitor transactions made through twelve
diferent currencies including Ether, Tether, and Bitcoin.235
Americans in general are skeptical of commercial and government information collection.236 Certain
groups within the BIPOC community, in particular, both feel more vulnerable to having their private
information exposed and are concerned about private or public entities having access to their
information.237 The lack of pseudonymity in crypto-asset markets and information sharing relationships
between crypto-asset firms may thus have disparate impacts on individuals within these communities.
231 From September 6, 2020 to September 6, 2022, there were 305 published complaints from servicemembers about crypto-assets. For
the purposes of this and other CFPB complaint data, crypto-asset complaints refer to published complaints submitted to the CFPB
in which servicemembers selected the sub-product “virtual currency” as the subject of the complaint. Published complaints do
not represent total complaints submitted. See CFPB, CFPB Complaint Database, https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/
consumer-complaints/search/?chartType=line&dateInterval=Month&date_received_max=2022-09-06&date_received_min=2020-09-
06&lens=Overview&product=Money%20transfer%2C%20virtual%20currency%2C%20or%20money%20service%E2%80%A2Virtual%20
currency&searchField=all&tab=Trends&tags=Servicemember.
232 Angela Walch, Deconstructing 'Decentralization': Exploring the Core Claim of Crypto Systems, in CryPto assets: legal and Monetary PersPeCtiVes,
oxford uniVersity Press (Chris Brummer ed., 2019), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3326244.
233 See Anna Baydakova, How Binance, Coinbase and 22 Other Crypto Exchanges Handle Your Data, CoindesK (Jan. 27, 2022), https://www.
coindesk.com/layer2/privacyweek/2022/01/27/before-you-click-i-agree-how-binance-coinbase-and-22-other-crypto-exchanges-
handle-your-data.
234 I d.
235 S ee Gabriella Sotelo, Coinbase Is Selling Data on Crypto and 'Geotracking' to ICE, gizModo (Jun. 30, 2022), https://gizmodo.com/
coinbase-selling-crypto-data-geotracking-to-ice-1849130014.
236 S ee Pew researCh Center, Americans and Privacy: Concerned, Confused and Feeling Lack of Control Over Their Personal Information, (Nov.
15, 2019), https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2019/11/15/americans-and-privacy-concerned-confused-and-feeling-lack-of-control-
over-their-personal-information.
237 Id.
49
VI. RECOMMENDATIONS
This report reviews the risks associated with primary use cases and prospective opportunities for
crypto-assets. Consumers, investors, and businesses are vulnerable to an array of risks in the crypto-
asset ecosystem.
Consistent with the objectives in the Executive Order to protect consumers, investors, and
businesses as well as responsible development of payment innovations and digital assets, this report
recommends a multi-pronged approach, described below. This approach builds on and complements
other recommended actions as described in the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG)
Report on Stablecoins238 as well as other reports pursuant to the Executive Order, including the report
under Section 4 on the future of money and payments, and the report under Section 6, on financial
stability risks and regulatory gaps.
Even as stakeholders continue to deliberate on legislative proposals on the subject of crypto- asset
market regulation, there are much needed actions to be undertaken in the meantime using the existing
authorities available to the regulators to protect the U.S. consumers, investors, and businesses. These
actions are described below.
Recommendation 1: U.S. regulatory and law enforcement authorities should, as appropriate, pursue
vigilant monitoring of the crypto-asset sector for unlawful activity, aggressively pursue investigations,
and bring civil and criminal actions to enforce applicable laws with a particular focus on consumer,
investor, and market protection.
As discussed earlier in Part IV, frauds, thefs, and scams have emerged as an especially grave area of concern
in the crypto-asset space. These unlawful activities cause significant financial harm to U.S. consumers,
investors, and businesses, amounting to over $1.6 billion in total losses reported to the FBI in 2021 alone.
• Expand and Increase Investigations and Enforcement: Regulators and law enforcement should
continue and consider expanding eforts to investigate, and, where appropriate, bring enforcement
or other legal action against unlawful activity in crypto-asset markets. In particular, authorities
should, where appropriate, increase investigation into misrepresentations made to consumers and
investors in crypto-assets, including, for example, false or misleading advertising, terms of service,
claims of returns or income potential, or statements of protections available to users of crypto-
assets. Even though overall crypto-asset activity appears to have decreased in the recent months,
regulators and law enforcement should remain vigilant in case unlawful conduct does not subside
or new types of illegal activities develop in the market.
Crypto-asset use cases trigger obligations under federal consumer protection laws at least to the
extent they are used for or in connection with ofering or providing consumer deposits, stored
value instruments, retail and other consumer payment mechanisms, the transmittal, exchange,
or storage of consumer funds, or in consumer credit arrangements. Relevant obligations include,
but are not limited to, the prohibition on unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices. Other
potential uses of crypto-assets—including but not limited to the marketing and sale of crypto-
238 See, e.g., President’s worKing grouP on finanCial MarKets, the federal dePosit insuranCe CorPoration & the offiCe of the CoMPtroller of the CurrenCy,
supra note 8.
50
assets as collectibles, or as features of gaming, entertainment, and other applications—are equally
susceptible to various forms of unfair, fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive practices. As such,
the CFPB and the FTC should continue to monitor and, as appropriate, expand eforts to conduct
investigations of consumer complaints and use their authorities to enforce against and prevent
unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices in the industry. Similarly, to the extent that crypto-
assets are marketed to retirement plans, the Department of Labor should conduct investigations
to ensure proper fiduciary conduct, and to protect plans and plan participants from aggressive
marketing, conflicts of interest, and imprudent and disloyal investments.
Moreover, to the extent that trading, lending, borrowing, or other activity in crypto-assets involves
securities or derivatives transactions, then these activities must be conducted in compliance with
federal securities laws and the Commodity Exchange Act, including applicable regulations. The
SEC and CFTC have engaged actively in the enforcement of fraud and other violations of federal
laws and regulations and have allocated additional resources to these eforts. These eforts,
maintaining crypto-assets as an enforcement priority, and continued development of specialized
personnel and resources are all important for investor protection.
• Coordinate Cross-Agency Enforcement Actions: Law enforcement oficials and regulators should,
as appropriate, continue to coordinate and combat fraud to deter unlawful behavior and improve
practices in crypto-asset markets. For example, the Department of Justice has an established team
in its Market Integrity and Major Frauds Unit that leads national eforts to combat fraud and market
manipulation involving cryptocurrency, in coordination with the Federal Reserve Board, the SEC,
the CFTC, and other agencies. Other coordinated or parallel actions, such as the Federal Reserve
and FDIC’s cease and desist notices regarding false or misleading representations of deposit
insurance status, and the CFPB’s release of guidance on the same topic, are impactful and should
be used more frequently, as appropriate—especially where consumers are likely to be misled by
such misrepresentations.
• Share Information on Illegal Crypto-asset Activity: Crypto-assets are continually evolving, as is
the illegal activity that uses crypto-assets. To ensure broad and consistent enforcement and
to supplement private sector analytics tools, regulators and law enforcement oficials should,
as appropriate, share information regarding the type and scale of fraudulent, misleading, or
manipulative market practices they are observing and investigating. For example, sharing data
could help identify relevant clusters of unlawful activity and spot trends in scams and fraud types.
Recommendation 2: U.S. regulatory agencies should use their existing authorities to issue supervisory
guidance and rules, as needed, to address current and emerging risks in crypto-asset products and
services for consumers, investors, and businesses. Agencies should work collaboratively to promote
consistent and comprehensive oversight.
The U.S. agencies should, as appropriate, review existing regulations and take steps to clarify
regulatory requirements applicable to crypto-asset products and services, address novel fraudulent
practices, and enhance disclosure requirements. These reviews should conclude with issuing
clarifications, as appropriate, such as the recently released FDIC fact sheet on the scope of deposit
insurance coverage that indicates that by federal law, the FDIC only insures deposits held in insured
51
banks and savings associations and only in the unlikely event of an insured bank’s failure. Where
appropriate, agencies should also clarify that some crypto-asset products and services are regulated—
despite assertions to the contrary by firms promoting these products and services—to help address
gaps in disclosures.
Crypto-asset products and services are new and rapidly developing, which can invoke jurisdictions
and interests of multiple federal and state regulatory and law enforcement authorities in potentially
novel ways. Further, crypto-assets and related intermediaries are subject to unique and evolving
operational risks, including cyber risks. As such, active collaboration and coordination is necessary
to ensure that crypto-asset products and services are subject to, and in compliance with, appropriate
supervision, oversight, regulation, collection, and disclosure requirements.
• Provide Guidance through Individual Actions: U.S. authorities have already taken useful steps to
provide clarity in the crypto-asset space through individual agency actions such as supervisory
guidance or rulemakings. Examples of such actions include the OCC’s interpretive letters that
clarify expectations of its regulated entities in regards to safeguarding digital assets for customers,
holding deposits that serve as reserves backing a stablecoin, and using distributed ledger
technology to facilitate payments; the FDIC’s cease and desist actions for false or misleading
representations about deposit insurance; and the SEC’s special purpose broker-dealer statement
on digital asset custody that identifies the circumstances in which the SEC will not take certain
enforcement action against broker-dealers with respect to digital asset securities. As appropriate,
regulators should pursue supervisory guidance or rulemaking to ensure that all crypto-asset
intermediaries properly account for novel operational risks, cyber risks, and consumer protection.
• Collaborate to Improve Clarity: Collaborative cross-agency initiatives such as crypto-asset “policy
sprints” undertaken by the U.S. federal prudential banking agencies provide meaningful benefits
for consumers, investors, and businesses. The “policy sprints” resulted in productive engagements
around common vocabulary, the identification and assessment of key risks, and the roadmap
that identified areas of future focus. Interagency bodies such as the PWG’s Financial and Banking
Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC) may also provide forums through which more
targeted coordination and supervision of cyber and other operational risks can be developed.
Such interagency coordination and parallel actions should continue, and, where appropriate, be
further strengthened through the formation of new working groups to address emerging issues in
crypto-asset markets and formal agreements to coordinate enforcement actions and share data.
• Provide Plain Language Guidance: Given significant interest of individual consumers, investors,
and populations vulnerable to disparate impacts in crypto-assets, and the many non-traditional
forms of projects and firms involved in crypto-asset activities, regulatory agencies should, as
much as possible, issue guidance, interpretations, and rulemaking related to crypto-assets in
plain language. Plain language guidance is that which is readily understandable by an audience of
laypersons, technologists, and non-professional parties with interests in the topic. One example
of plain language guidance is the Department of Labor’s compliance assistance issued in March
2022, which presented that agency’s “serious concerns” with cryptocurrencies as investments in
defined contribution plans, such as 401(k) plans, in plain language easily understandable by plan
fiduciaries, employers, and plan participants. Candid descriptions of the potential risks associated
52
with new categories of investments are an essential part of improving practices of plan fiduciaries
when acting on behalf of plan participants in managing retirement holdings.
Recommendation 3: U.S. authorities should, where appropriate, work individually and through the
Financial Literacy and Education Commission (FLEC) to ensure that U.S. consumers, investors, and
businesses have access to trustworthy information on crypto-assets.
Users of crypto-asset platforms have significant exposure to risks, including risks of default and
outright thef. Further, users ofen may not be fully aware of these risks, given crypto-asset market
participants’ frequent emphasis on trading profits with minimal reference to losses, as well as the
general lack of comprehensive disclosure. For these reasons, the FLEC should, as appropriate,
coordinate and promote consumer education eforts on crypto-assets. These eforts should ensure
that consumer-friendly, trustworthy, and consistent education materials are accessible and inclusive,
to the maximum extent possible. Such materials should:
(i) Highlight risks associated with investors’ or consumers’ use of crypto-assets, including
heightened risks of frauds, thefs, and scams;
(ii) Identify and warn against common practices employed by perpetrators of frauds, thefs, and
scams;
(iii) Provide information on how to report unlawful practices and submit consumer and investor
complaints; and
(iv) Provide information on operational risks that are unique to the crypto-asset ecosystem and how
they may impact investment value.
Considering the lack of data and information on use of crypto-assets by populations vulnerable to
disparate impacts, FLEC member agencies should also consider exploring using existing surveys to
collect new or additional data, as appropriate.
Finally, the FLEC should, where appropriate, engage with industry leaders, academics, and other
relevant parties to promote and coordinate public and private strategies for financial education
outreach to consumers.
53
54

================================================================================

